Title: Discrete Diffusion Models via Evolving Variational Autoregressive Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.27306v1

Published Time: Thu, 24 Sep 2026 00:31:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Discrete Diffusion Models via Evolving Variational Autoregressive Networks 

Kewen Pan 1 and Ying Tang 1, 2, 3, 4, ∗

> 1

Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

> 2

School of Physics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

> 3

Key Laboratory of Quantum Physics and Photonic Quantum Information, Ministry of Education, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

> 4

Non-classical Information Science Basic Discipline Research Center of Sichuan Province, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

Conventional score-based diffusion models learn scores without representing normalized densi-ties, whereas tractable normalized models support both sampling and direct likelihood evaluation. A recent tensor-network approach provides such a representation but is largely restricted to low-dimensional lattices. Here we introduce a discrete diffusion model that parameterizes normalized probability distributions using variational autoregressive networks. Explicit Markov jump operators govern the forward noising and reverse denoising dynamics, extending discrete diffusion models with normalized distributions to spin systems on higher-dimensional lattices. We apply this framework to the two- and three-dimensional Ising models across ordered, critical, and disordered regimes, ac-curately computing thermodynamic quantities including free energy, energy, and magnetization. We further integrate the framework with Monte Carlo sampling, using adaptive diffusion steps to main-tain high acceptance rates even at low temperatures while enhancing sample diversity. These results establish a neural-network framework for the discrete diffusion model with normalized probability distributions. 

> Keywords: Discrete diffusion model, Markov chain Monte Carlo, Stochastic dynamics

I. INTRODUCTION 

Inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, diffu-sion models constitute a powerful class of generative models [1]. They follow a two-stage pipeline in which a forward process gradually corrupts samples from the target distribution toward a tractable prior (Uniform, Gaussian, etc.), and a trained reverse process removes this corruption to generate new samples [2–4]. Never-theless, many classical diffusion models were originally designed for continuous-valued data, such as images [4– 6] and audio [7, 8], and cannot be applied directly to discrete-state systems. To adapt to different data modalities, discrete diffusion models corrupt their inputs through explicit state tran-sitions rather than additive Gaussian noise [9], and they have achieved substantial progress in numerous practi-cal domains, such as natural language processing [10–15], biological sequence generation [16–19], and the study of spin systems [20–22]. Nevertheless, the most widely used diffusion models are score based: they learn the gradient of the log density and therefore represent only unnormal-ized densities. This creates three difficulties, which are especially challenging in statistical physics. First, learn-ing the score over the full support of a high-dimensional, sparsely sampled distribution is hard; second, reaching the noise prior requires evolving the forward process for a long time, whereas finite-time denoising in practice in-troduces reconstruction error [23]; and third, evaluating  

> ∗Corresponding authors: jamestang23@gmail.com

the likelihood—and hence the free energy—of generated samples from a learned score function is non-trivial. Recent work on discrete diffusion models based on ten-sor networks directly confronted these limitations [24]. By encoding the normalized distribution as a matrix product state (MPS) and the diffusion operators as ma-trix product operators, this approach obtains both a nor-malized distribution and an exact likelihood—precisely the quantities that score-based models cannot provide. This is an important advance that we build upon. Its principal limitation, however, is representational: MPS is intrinsically adapted to quasi-one-dimensional geome-tries, and the associated computational cost grows pro-hibitively with the spatial dimension. Indeed, on mod-erately sized two-dimensional cylindrical Ising models (8 × 30 and 9 × 30) the tensor-network magnetization per site already deviates from Monte Carlo benchmarks at the critical temperature, and a direct application to three-dimensional lattices is not feasible. These gaps mo-tivate a normalized discrete diffusion model whose rep-resentation is not constrained by the lattice dimension. In this work, we replace tensor networks with vari-ational autoregressive networks (VAN) [25, 26], an ap-proach that has proven effective for problems in chem-ical reaction networks [27, 28], computational biology [29], and quantum many-body systems [30–32]. Fig. 1 explains our research motivation and depicts the frame-work of our VAN-based discrete diffusion model. Unlike conventional approaches, which learn score functions and thus represent only unnormalized densities, and unlike the matrix-product-state construction, whose represen-tation is tied to quasi-one-dimensional geometries, our framework retains an explicitly normalized distribution arXiv:2609.27306v1 [cs.LG] 23 Sep 2026 (Ours) Variational autoregressive networks           

> Higher dimensions &Tractable diffusion steps
> (Prior) Tensor networks
> 𝑃 0
> 𝜃 𝑃 1
> 𝜃 𝑃 𝑡
> 𝜃
> …
> Standard diffusion model: unnormalized distribution
> 𝑃 0
> 𝜃 𝑄 0→𝑡
> 𝜃
> Target distribution
> 𝑃 0
> 𝜃 ?
> Noise distribution
> Denoising via score function
> Normalized distribution FIG. 1. Discrete diffusion model by denoising normalized distribution of variational autoregressive networks.
> Standard diffusion models adopt a forward noising process and recover samples via a learned score function, without yielding explicit and tractable normalized probability representations for physical simulations. Prior work based on tensor networks addressed this by encoding normalized distributions as matrix product states, and representing the operators acting on them as matrix product operators. Building on that idea, we replace tensor networks with VAN, which learns the normalized distribution at each diffusion step under a fixed transition operator. Compared with tensor networks, our VAN method achieves improved performance in high-dimensional systems and makes diffusion steps tractable.

while using an autoregressive ansatz in place of a ma-trix product state. This yields three concrete gains: (i) the likelihood is available at every diffusion step, so the variational free energy can be evaluated directly; (ii) the ansatz is agnostic to the lattice geometry, so the same network applies to two- and three-dimensional lattices alike, without introducing a bond dimension. We vali-date the precise modeling capability of our method for spin systems through experiments on 2D and 3D Ising models [33], benchmarking thermodynamic observables against tensor network baselines and Wolff cluster Monte Carlo across ordered, critical, and disordered temper-ature regimes; and (iii) meanwhile, machine-learning-augmented Monte Carlo methods have attracted exten-sive research attention in recent statistical physics work [24, 34, 35]. Adopting the same sampling paradigm uti-lized in the tensor network approach, we further integrate our VAN-based discrete diffusion model with Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which produces non-local updates that break the locality bottleneck of single-spin-flip sampling, sustains high acceptance rates down to low temperatures, and enhances sample diversity.   

> II. BACKGROUND A. Variational autoregressive networks

We consider the problem of sampling the target dis-tribution P defined over a finite discrete state space 

S = {− 1, +1 }D . Specifically, the target distribution adopted in our study follows the Boltzmann distribution 

P (σ) = 1

Z e−βE (σ), (1) where β = 1 /T denotes the inverse temperature, E(σ)is a known energy function, and σ = ( σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ D )denotes the spin configuration, with each discrete spin variable satisfying σi ∈ {− 1, +1 }. The term Z denotes the partition function, a critical normalization constant defined as the sum of exponential energy terms over all configurations of the system 

Z = X

> σ

e−βE (σ). (2) The spin system has a state space containing 2 D distinct configurations, so the number of configurations grows ex-ponentially with the system size D. This exponential scaling of the configuration space means that the exact numerical computation of Z becomes computationally in-tractable for systems with large D.To address this limitation, the VAN achieves tractable modeling via a variational autoregressive factorization scheme in Fig. 2(a), which decomposes the intractable joint probability distribution into a product of condi-tional probabilities in a prescribed sequential order 

P θ (σ) = 

> D

Y

> i=1

P θ (σi | σ1, . . . , σ i−1), (3) where θ denotes the learnable parameters. Owing to its inherent autoregressive architecture, the VAN possesses 2(b) Inference 

(c) Application: Discrete diffusion models combined with Monte Carlo for sampling spin configurations 

(a) Training 

Autoregressive Sampling 

Autoregressive Sampling 

Autoregressive Sampling 

Noising 

Denoising 

𝝈 

𝝈 ′

𝐴𝑐𝑐 𝝈 ′ 𝝈 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛[1, 𝑃(𝝈 ′)𝑃(𝝈) 𝜋(𝝈|𝝈 ′)𝜋(𝝈 ′|𝝈) ]

Autoregressive factorization:  𝑃 𝜃 𝝈 = ς𝑖=1  

> 𝒟

𝑃 𝜃 𝜎 𝒟 |𝜎 1, … ,  𝜎 𝒟 −1 

Accept or reject 

𝒖 

Autoregressive sampling 

Tau -leaping: 

multi -step denoising 

𝑊 𝜃 

𝜎 1

Recycle 

𝑡 𝑖  𝑡 𝑖 −𝑛 

𝑃 𝜃 (𝜎 1)

𝑊 𝜃 

𝜎 2

𝑃 𝜃 (𝜎 2|𝜎 1)

𝑊 𝜃 

𝜎 𝒟 

𝑃 𝜃 (𝜎 𝒟 |𝜎 1, … ,  𝜎 𝒟 −1 )

…

𝜎 𝑖  ~Bernoulli(𝑃 0

> 𝜃

(𝜎 𝑖 |𝜎 1, … ,  𝜎 𝑖−1 )) 

Minimize loss function:  𝐿 𝑡  = 𝐷 𝑘𝑙 [𝑃 𝑡 2 

> 𝜃

|(𝐼 +  𝑡 2 − 𝑡 1 𝑊)𝑃 𝑡 1 

> 𝜃

]

𝑃 𝑡 2 = 𝑒  𝑡 2 −𝑡 1 𝑊 𝑃 𝑡 1 𝑒  𝑡 2 −𝑡 1 𝑊 ≈ 𝐼 +  𝑡 2 − 𝑡 1 𝑊 

Diffusion evolution of the distribution:  𝑑𝑃 = 𝑊𝑃𝑑𝑡 

Autoregressive Sampling 

Exact denoising process: 

step -by -step denoising 

𝑡 𝑖  𝑡 𝑖 −𝑛 𝑡 𝑖 −1  𝑡 𝑖 −𝑛+1 FIG. 2. Overview of our discrete diffusion model: training procedure, inference strategy, and application. (a) The autoregressive mechanism and diffusion evolution enable tractable optimization of the loss function. (b) We consider two denoising strategies for inference: an exact denoising scheme for the Euler-discretized forward noising process, and an accelerated denoising scheme based on the tau-leaping algorithm. (c) We integrate the discrete diffusion model with the MCMC sampler to enable efficient sampling of spin configurations. 

two notable features for the Boltzmann distribution ap-proximation. First, it is capable of capturing long-range spatial correlations among spin variables. Second, the sequential factorization structure supports precise likeli-hood evaluation of generated configurations P θ (σ) and autoregressive sampling, allowing independent configura-tion generation in a predefined order. The training objective of VAN is to optimize the pa-rameterized variational ansatz P θ to precisely fit the tar-get Boltzmann distribution P . To quantitatively mea-sure distribution mismatch and guide the optimization process, we utilize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, a standard measure for evaluating the difference between two probability distributions. Specifically, we employ re-verse KL divergence, which only requires explicit knowl-edge of the energy function and allows model training using samples drawn directly from the model itself: 

DKL (P θ || P ) = X

> σ

P θ (σ) log 

 P θ (σ)

P (σ)



= β(F (θ) − F ), (4) where 

F = − 1

β log Z (5) represents the free energy of the system. Owing to the non-negativity of the KL divergence, the variational free energy 

F (θ) = 1

β

X

> σ

P θ (σ)  log P θ (σ) + βE (σ) (6) serves as an upper bound of the exact free energy F . Min-imizing F (θ) narrows the gap between this variational free energy F (θ) and the exact free energy F , while driv-ing the parameterized distribution P θ (σ) to gradually converge to the exact distribution of the system. Compared to tensor networks [36, 37], the key advan-tage of VAN is the ability to approximate complex target distributions with its superior generality. Unlike MPS, which are inherently limited to one-dimensional systems, the neural network-based ansatz of VAN can be applied to systems with arbitrary topological structures. For example, convolutional neural networks (CNN) [38] are 3highly suitable for modeling two-dimensional systems, as their convolutional architecture efficiently captures local spatial structure in 2D data, similar to how it processes image information. VAN has proven to be a powerful tool for studying equilibrium statistical mechanics [39–41]. Beyond equi-librium problems, it is also applicable to exploring the time evolution dynamics of nonequilibrium systems in statistical mechanics [42]. By accurately approximat-ing the normalized probability distribution at each time step, the VAN enables efficient calculation of the dy-namical partition function — a core quantity for charac-terizing dynamical phase transitions and extracting es-sential dynamical observables. This capability broadens the research scope of statistical mechanics, allowing re-searchers to reveal finite-time dynamical phase diagrams, critical scaling laws, and emergent spatial structures that are challenging for conventional analytical and numerical approaches. Discrete diffusion models are designed to describe unidirectional stochastic Markov processes and thus belong to the class of nonequilibrium dynamical sys-tems. Leveraging the strong capability of VAN in cap-turing nonequilibrium evolution, we integrate the above VAN-based dynamic learning framework into discrete dif-fusion models.  

> B. Discrete noising process

We formulate the noising dynamics as a continuous time Markov chain (CTMC), which is a stochastic pro-cess on a discrete state space S with the Markov prop-erty. The time evolution of the probability distribution 

Pt satisfies the master equation 

dP t

dt = W P t, (7) where the standard form of the Markov generator W is given by 

Wσ′σ =

(

w(σ′ ← σ), if σ′̸ = σ

−R(σ), if σ′ = σ. (8) We consider the bistochastic noising dynamics built from non-interacting single-spin flips. Transitions are al-lowed only between configurations separated by a Ham-ming distance d = 1, i.e., configurations differing by a single spin flip. The transition rates are defined as 

w(σ′ ← σ) = 

(

1, d(σ′, σ) = 1 0, otherwise . (9) The corresponding escape rates are R(σ) =P  

> σ′̸=σ

w(σ′ ← σ) = D. This construction endows 

W with two key properties: probability normalization is preserved under time evolution, and the probability distribution asymptotically converges to the uniform distribution, which serves as the stationary distribution satisfying W P uniform = 0. Based on the master equation Eq. (7), the evolution of the probability distribution from t = t1 to t = t2 can be equivalently expressed as 

P θt2 = e(t2−t1)W P θt1 = Qt2←t1 P θt1 . (10) For a sufficiently small time interval ∆ t = t2 − t1, the matrix can be approximated via the first-order Euler ex-pansion: e∆tW ≈ I + ∆ tW , where I denotes the identity matrix and D∆t ≤ 1. A typical choice satisfying this bound is ∆ t = 1 /(2 D). Accordingly, the transition prob-ability under this Euler approximation takes the form 

pt2|t1 (y|x) = δ(y, x ) + ∆ tW (y, x ) + o(∆ t), (11) where o(∆ t) represents higher-order infinitesimal terms vanishing faster than ∆ t, and δ(y, x ) is the Kronecker delta that takes value 1 when x = y and 0 other-wise. We adopt this first-order Euler approximation to construct the forward noising process of our discrete diffusion model, whose dynamics are governed by the single-spin-flip generator W . 

> C. Discrete denoising process

Efficient simulation of discrete stochastic processes is a fundamental challenge in statistical physics and com-putational modeling. For our discrete diffusion model, which enables tractable probability flow between adja-cent time steps, the Euler-discretized reverse process can be analytically derived based on Bayes’ theorem [43] 

πt1|t2 (x1 | x2) = πt2|t1 (x2 | x1) Pt1 (x1)

Pt2 (x2) , t1 < t 2. (12) The Alg. 1 details the full implementation pipeline for the Euler-discretized denoising update rules of our discrete diffusion model. 

Algorithm 1 Stepwise Euler-discretized denoising                                                          

> Require: A transition rate w, time partition 0 = t0< t 1<
> · · · < t K.
> 1: Draw uK∼PθtK.
> 2: for k=Kdownto 1do
> 3: Set uk−1=
> 4:
> 
> u, w.p. ∆ tkwPθtk−1(u)
> Ptk θ(uk)
> uk,w.p. 1 −P
> u̸=uk
> ∆tkwPθtk−1(u)
> Ptk θ(uk)
> 5: where ∆ tk=tk−tk−1and u̸=uk.
> 6: end for
> 7: return u0∼Pθt0.

The stepwise Euler-discretized denoising method takes the form of a two-stage algorithm outlined below: 4(i) Firstly, it initializes the noisy states uK . The states are generated either by applying sequential flips to the t = 0 samples following our noising rules or by direct sampling from the distribution P θtK .(ii) Then it iteratively reconstructs the latent states 

uk−1 from uk. The probability of updating uk

is given by ∆ tkwP θtk−1 (u)/P θtk (uk). Instead of di-rectly evaluating P θtk (uk), we can compute it from 

P θtk−1 using the noising rule to ensure that the prob-ability of retaining the state uk remains positive. Although this stepwise denoising approach yields ac-curate results, it suffers from substantial computational overhead and low sampling efficiency, particularly for long denoising trajectories. To balance numerical ac-curacy and computational cost, we incorporate the tau-leaping into our discrete diffusion model. Tau-leaping is an approximate stochastic simulation method designed to accelerate sampling of discrete-state Markov processes, offering noticeable efficiency improve-ments for systems with frequent state transitions. Origi-nally proposed and widely employed in chemical physics, this technique accelerates simulations of large reaction networks with abundant reaction events [44–46]. More recently, tau-leaping has been extended to discrete dif-fusion models based on CTMC for an efficient approx-imation of the generative reverse process [47]. Unlike the classic Gillespie algorithm [48, 49], which simulates only one transition event per iteration, tau-leaping bun-dles numerous transition events in a single step to reduce computational burden. This property makes tau-leaping particularly suitable for high-dimensional systems with rapid transition rates. 

Algorithm 2 Tau-leaping                                                                                           

> Require: A transition rate w, time partition 0 = t0< t 1<
> · · · < t K, optimal leap duration τ.
> 1: Draw uK∼PθtK, where K=⌈tK
> τ⌉.
> 2: Encoding map: ϕ(uK) = ( uK+ 1) /2
> 3: for k=Kdownto 1do
> 4: for d= 1 to Ddo
> 5: for zd∈ { 0,1} \ { udk}do
> 6: Draw Md,z d∼Poisson( τ wP θtk(ud,z d
> k)/P θtk(uk)).
> 7: end for
> 8: end for
> 9: Set x=uk+PD
> d=1
> P
> zd∈{ 0,1}\{ udk}(zd−udk)Md,z d.
> 10: Set uk−1=Muk(x), where Muk(x) = {xdδS(xd) +
> zd(1 −δS(xd)) }d∈[D]is a mapping from ZDto SD.
> 11: end for
> 12: return Decoding map: ϕ−1(u0) = 2 u0−1

Compared with the Alg. 1, the tau-leaping method for our discrete diffusion model also adopts a two-stage pro-cedure and retains an identical first stage. In its second stage, stepwise Euler-discretized denoising is substituted with an approximate leap over a predetermined optimal leap duration τ (Supplementary Appendix C). Instead of simulating every transition separately, the tau-leaping method assumes that the reverse transition rates and the state uk remain constant throughout the interval τ . We sample Poisson counts Md,z d for each coordinate d, ag-gregate these counts and apply them to the state uk at the end of the interval τ to form the state x. x is then projected onto the valid discrete state space S via the mapping Muk (·) to produce the latent state uk−1. Al-though the tau-leaping method reduces computational cost, we revert to the stepwise Euler-discretized denois-ing method when strict numerical accuracy is required.  

> III. NUMERICAL RESULTS

The Ising model is defined on a discrete spin lat-tice with nearest-neighbor pairwise interactions, whose Hamiltonian is given by 

E(σ) = −J X

> ⟨i,j ⟩

σiσj , (13) where ⟨i, j ⟩ denotes nearest-neighbor pairs of spins, and the ferromagnetic coupling strength is set to J = 1. In the thermodynamic limit, the two-dimensional Ising model undergoes a continuous phase transition at the critical inverse temperature βc = ln  1 + √2/2. The sys-tem remains disordered for β < β c at high temperatures and develops spontaneous magnetic order for β > β c at low temperatures. We first consider the two-dimensional Ising model de-fined on a D = L1 × L2 lattice ( L2 ≥ L1) with cylindri-cal boundary conditions, where periodic boundary con-ditions (PBC) are applied along the first dimension and open boundary conditions (OBC) along the second di-mension. We adopt lattice sizes of 8 × 30 and 9 × 30 at the critical inverse temperature βc, which produce nu-merical biases in the tensor network approach compared to standard Monte Carlo benchmarks [24]. To quantify the accuracy of the learned distributions, we define the absolute magnetization per site as 

m = 1

D

> D

X

> i=1

σi , (14) and compare both the magnetization and the energy per site against the reference data. The comparison results in Fig. 3 demonstrate that our VAN method achieves higher accuracy in predicting magnetization per site than ten-sor networks, while producing reliable estimates for the energy per site. We adopt results from the Wolff cluster algorithm (Supplementary Alg. 3) as reference data in our work. We further perform systematic simulations on both 2D and 3D Ising models with full PBC: for 2D lat-tices, all horizontal and vertical boundaries are period-ically connected; for 3D lattices, periodicity is imposed along all three spatial dimensions, which guarantees uni-form nearest-neighbor spin interactions across the entire 5FIG. 3. Tensor networks and VAN-based discrete diffusion models on 2D Ising model. (a) Magnetization per site obtained via the tensor network approach [24], the Wolff cluster algorithm, and our method with averages taken over 10 5    

> independent samples, on 8 ×30 and 9 ×30 lattices. (b) Comparison of energy per site under the same simulation parameters. Note that energy per site data from the tensor network approach are unavailable in the original reference.

system. We compute the free energy per site, energy per site, and magnetization per site for lattices of size 16 × 16 (2D) and 4 × 4 × 4 (3D) over a wide temperature range spanning the low-temperature ordered regime, the high-temperature disordered regime, and the phase tran-sition point. Three-dimensional lattices are substantially more demanding for tensor networks, whose computa-tional cost and memory usage grow exponentially with the spatial dimension and severely hinder the accurate characterization of long-range spin correlations. This is precisely the regime in which a neural autoregressive rep-resentation remains tractable, and the resulting estimates are summarized in Fig. 4. Since the 3D Ising model has no exact solution for free energy, we computed the free energy using FlashVAN [26]—currently the state-of-the-art method—and used the resulting values as a bench-mark for comparison.  

> IV. INTEGRATING DISCRETE DIFFUSION INTO MCMC PROPOSAL UPDATES

From a theoretical perspective, perfect alignment be-tween the learned VAN P θ and the target equilibrium distribution would render autoregressive sampling fully unbiased, eliminating the need for supplementary MCMC correction. In practice, however, practical neural network approximations inevitably suffer from a distribution mis-match against the true distribution, due to limited train-ing data, inherent architectural constraints of neural net-works, and fundamental optimization barriers. A typical symptom of this discrepancy is mode collapse, inducing biased results and poor sample diversity. Furthermore, the learned distribution may correspond to a high tem-perature distribution, whereas our objective is to sample the target distribution at lower temperatures. Instead of merely retraining the neural network to eliminate such distribution gaps, we introduce a proposal module based on a discrete diffusion model (DDM) embedded in the MCMC workflow, which enables efficient sampling of the desired target distribution [50, 51]. To ensure reliable MCMC sampling, we need to train a discrete diffusion model to recover corrupted samples and steer them toward reasonable data distributions. Unlike standard discrete diffusion models, our method adopts a fundamentally different stepwise training scheme for modeling sequential distributions. To adapt to this spe-cialized training paradigm, we first formulate step-by-step loss functions to optimize the VAN parameters loss( P θt ) = 

(

Eσ∼P θt

log P θt (σ) + βE (σ) , t = 0 

Eσ∼P θt

log P θt (σ) − log Pt(σ) , t > 0.

(15) Concretely, the training pipeline of our discrete diffusion model is implemented in two stages: (i) We first train a VAN to fit the target distribution, which serves as the initial distribution of the diffu-sion process at step t = 0. (ii) Given the trained distribution P θt−1, we employ the transition rate w and the time step ∆ t to com-pute the supervised training target Pt(σ), which is required to train the VAN of the subsequent dif-fusion step. Iterative execution of this procedure constructs the complete forward noising process in an explicit and deterministic manner. For all t > 0, we initialize the VAN with the trained parameters from the previous step and fine-tune it with a small number of optimization iterations to obtain the dis-tribution P θt .Equipped with the trained discrete diffusion model, we construct our adaptive MCMC sampler. Fig. 2(c) il-lustrates its complete framework and pipeline, and each MCMC iteration proceeds as follows. 6FIG. 4. Learned discrete diffusion models for 2D and 3D Ising models at distinct temperatures. (a) Free energy per site, (b) energy per site and (c) magnetization per site as functions of inverse temperature β.The upper row corresponds to the D = 16 × 16 two-dimensional Ising model with temperatures T = 1/β =1/ ln  1 + √2, 1.5000 , 2.0000 , 2/ ln  1 + √2, 2.5000 , 3.0000 , 3.5000 , 4.0000 , 4/ ln  1 + √2. The lower row presents statistical re-sults for the D = 4 ×4×4 three-dimensional Ising model at temperatures T = 1 /β = 3 .5000 , 4.0000 , 4.5115 , 5.0000 , 5.5000 , 6.0000. All systems are simulated with periodic boundary conditions and all results are averaged over 10 5 independent samples. 

(1) All MCMC chains are initialized with spin lattice configurations σ sampled autoregressively from the VAN-learned distribution P θ 

> 0

. Under this autoregressive sam-pling scheme, the spin variable σi at each lattice site i is sampled from its conditional distribution given all previ-ously sampled spins 

σi ∼ Bernoulli  P θ 

> 0

(σi | σ1, . . . , σ i−1) . (16) (2) Then the initial spin configurations σ are pro-gressively corrupted through a sequence of forward dif-fusion steps t to produce noisy states u, which disrupt the original structural features of the spin lattice. Start-ing from these corrupted configurations u, we invert the noising process via either the Euler-discretized denoising or the tau-leaping method to reconstruct candidate spin states σ′. The corresponding transition probability of this noising-and-denoising proposal process is given by 

π(σ′ | σ) = X

> u

Pt|0(u | σ)P0|t(σ′ | u)= X

> u

Pt|0(u | σ)Pt|0(u | σ′) P θ 

> 0

(σ′)

P θt (u) . (17) (3) To draw samples that conform to the target equi-librium distribution, candidate spin configurations σ′ are further accepted or rejected according to the standard Metropolis–Hastings acceptance probability, defined as Acc [ σ → σ′] = min 



1, Ptrue (σ′)π(σ | σ′)

Ptrue (σ)π(σ′ | σ)



= min 

"

1, e−βE (σ′)P θ 

> 0

(σ)

e−βE (σ)P θ 

> 0

(σ′)

#

, (18) where the simplification adopts the conditional probabil-ity formula in Eq. (17). When employing tau-leaping for denoising, a sufficient numerical accuracy must be main-tained to ensure that Eq. (18) is satisfied. In Fig. 5, we investigate how acceptance and decorrelation vary with diffusion steps and target-distribution temperature. At fixed diffusion steps, a larger temperature gap lowers ac-ceptance and leads to weaker decorrelation. Interestingly, more diffusion step updates reduce acceptance, but the additional spin flips applied to candidate configurations enhance decorrelation upon acceptance. We define the decorrelation coefficient as 1 − C, where C is the normal-ized correlation coefficient 

C =

> D

X

> d=1

1

N − 1

> N

X

> i=1



σ(k) 

> i,d

− ¯σ(k)

> d

  

σ(k+1)  

> i,d

− ¯σ(k+1) 

> d

!vuut DX

> d=1

Var 



σ(k)

> d

! DX

> d=1

Var 



σ(k+1) 

> d

!

(19) 7FIG. 5. Sampling characteristics for different distribu-tions and diffusion steps. (a) Acceptance rate as a func-tion of diffusion steps for N = 128 independent configurations of the 16 ×16 two-dimensional Ising model in the first MCMC iteration, each initialized at inverse temperature β = βc/2 and quenched to target inverse temperatures β = 0 .25 , 0.30 , 0.35 and 0 .40 (repeated over 40 independent runs). (b) Decor-relation coefficient versus diffusion steps for the same set of configurations at each target temperature. The results reveal two consistent trends across all tested temperatures: a larger temperature gap reduces both the acceptance and configura-tion decorrelation, while increasing the diffusion steps lowers the acceptance via a sharp drop at early steps but improves configuration decorrelation. 

to evaluate statistical independence between successive sampled spin configurations  σ(k), σ(k+1) . Here, σ(k+1) 

denotes the configuration obtained after the Metropo-lis–Hastings acceptance step. Our adaptive strategy can effectively balance acceptance and decorrelation to en-hance the quality of samples: we increase the diffusion time t if the acceptance probability exceeds the preset target threshold and decrease t otherwise. The spin con-figurations obtained from the previous MCMC iteration are then adopted as initial states for the next iteration, and this sampling pipeline is run iteratively until all Markov chains achieve convergence. Our MCMC sampler exploits the two-stage nois-ing–denoising dynamics of discrete diffusion models to construct high quality proposal samples for spin lattice systems. In our framework, the forward diffusion pro-cess introduces a sequence of unconstrained random spin flips to diversify the lattice structures, which effectively shifts samples to a “higher-temperature” regime with a much more accessible state space for broad exploration [51]. The subsequent reverse denoising process imposes structured constraints on the spin flips to guide the em-pirical distribution of the generated samples to align with the original distribution P θ 

> 0

, reverting configura-tions to the “lower-temperature” regime. By restrict-ing spin flips, this denoising procedure mitigates large deviations of candidate samples from the target distri-bution that arise from random spin flips, which mod-erately increases the acceptance rate in the subsequent Metropolis–Hastings acceptance step. By evolving spin configurations through complete forward corruption and reverse denoising reconstruction, our method generates non-local lattice perturbations, fundamentally breaking the spatial locality bottleneck of the conventional Local Metropolis Monte Carlo (LMMC; Supplementary Alg. 4). Traditional LMMC relies on limited local updates, which frequently trap Markov chains in free-energy local min-ima during long simulations and fail to fully explore the entire configuration space. Our MCMC method built on discrete diffusion models corresponds to the connected update proposed in prior work [24], where the current spin configuration σ and the proposed candidate configuration σ′ are statistically correlated. Meanwhile, the prior work also presents a disconnected update scheme, which generates a fully in-dependent candidate configuration σ′ with no correlation to the original state σ. In our work, we adopt the neu-ral MCMC (NMCMC) to implement such disconnected updates (Supplementary Alg. 5). The generated candi-date configuration is accepted or rejected following the acceptance probability Acc [ σ → σ′] = min 



1, Ptrue (σ′)π(σ | σ′)

Ptrue (σ)π(σ′ | σ)



= min 

"

1, e−βE (σ′)P θ 

> 0

(σ)

e−βE (σ)P θ 

> 0

(σ′)

#

, (20) where the candidate state σ′ is drawn from the marginal proposal distribution P θ 

> 0

parameterized by the VAN. Since σ′ is statistically independent of the current con-figuration σ, the transition kernel satisfies π(σ′ | σ) = 

P θ 

> 0

(σ′). In Fig. 6, we present the performance of all sam-pling methods considered under Monte Carlo “quench” protocols. Notably, equipped with non-local update mechanisms realized via connected and disconnected update schemes, our two proposed methods sustain acceptance rates higher than LMMC throughout the low-temperature regime, especially the connected update scheme. A naive strategy to break the locality barrier of LMMC is to flip multiple random spins per iteration; unfortunately, this simple modification progressively re-duces the acceptance rate. To further quantify the qual-ity of the samples about different methods, we evalu-ated two quantities in Fig. 6(c): the magnetization-based ESS fraction and sample diversity. The ESS fraction is 1  

1 + 2 PKk=1 ρ(k)



, where ρ(k) denotes the auto-correlation of the averaged absolute-magnetization series at lag k and K is the lag at which ρ(k) first becomes non-positive. Sample diversity measures the number of distinct spin configurations among the samples. All three methods are run for identical durations, and we compare the diversity of an equal number of samples collected 8FIG. 6. Monte Carlo quench. (a) Schematic of the quench process, where spin lattice configurations transition from higher-temperature initial states to lower-temperature target states. (b) Acceptance rates over 10 000 sampling iterations (data points displayed at 10-iteration intervals), evaluated across 64 independent configurations of the D = 16 × 16 2D Ising model undergoing a quench from T = 2 to T = 1 .5. Three sampling schemes are compared: DDM (discrete diffusion model; connected updates; adaptive acceptance target 0.5), NMCMC (neural Markov chain Monte Carlo; disconnected updates), and LMMC (local Metropolis Monte Carlo). (c) Comparison of magnetization-based effective sample size (ESS) fraction and sample diversity, where the ESS fraction estimates the proportion of statistically independent samples in MCMC chains and sample diversity quantifies the number of distinct spin configurations explored during sampling. Simulations adopt the same parameters as panel (b), and results are averaged over 10 independent runs. 

within this fixed runtime. Since NMCMC and LMMC generate more total samples in the same runtime, we ran-domly take a subset of their samples so that the sample count used for comparison equals that of DDM. For a fair comparison, each method is run on the faster of our available CPU and GPU: DDM and NMCMC on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU (24 GB, CUDA 12.2, PyTorch 2.8), and LMMC on the CPU (AMD Ryzen 9 7950X3D, 16 cores). In general, our methods explore a substantially broader configuration space than the single-spin-flip update of LMMC while attaining higher acceptance rates. This generates more diverse samples and reduces the total number of iterations required for convergence, at the cost of increased computational time per iteration. Even so, non-local sampling strategies of this kind exhibit promis-ing prospects for efficient equilibrium sampling. Lastly, we outline three key limitations and practi-cal constraints of our framework. First, the efficiency and reliability of the sampling depend heavily on how well the neural networks are trained, which may fail to capture low-probability configurations that nevertheless bear physical significance. Second, our framework brings higher computational costs than standard spin-flip up-date algorithms, since generating candidate samples via the discrete diffusion model and computing their likeli-hood increases the cost of every iteration, although faster chain mixing can partially compensate for this extra over-head. Third, it remains challenging to establish strict theoretical bounds for the entire MCMC process.  

> V. DISCUSSION

In this work, we have constructed a new type of dis-crete diffusion model in which the normalized distribu-tions at successive diffusion times are parameterized by an evolving VAN. Compared with prior discrete diffu-sion models based on tensor networks [24], our frame-work shows favorable performance on high-dimensional lattice systems and alleviates the dimensionality bottle-neck commonly encountered by MPS. We incorporate the tau-leaping algorithm to accelerate the sequential denoising process. Relative to the step-by-step denois-ing baseline, the tau-leaping-accelerated method reduces iterative computational overhead while maintaining ac-ceptable numerical precision for most sampling scenarios, achieving a better trade-off between computational cost and sampling accuracy. Comprehensive numerical exper-iments on both two- and three-dimensional Ising models verify that our method can accurately capture thermody-namic observables including free energy per site, energy per site, and magnetization per site across diverse tem-peratures, delivering competitive or even better numeri-cal accuracy than tensor-network baselines, especially for challenging three-dimensional spin systems. We have also shown how to integrate the discrete dif-fusion model with MCMC to establish an efficient sam-pling paradigm for discrete spin systems. Our unified pipeline supports two complementary sampling strate-gies, namely connected update and disconnected update, which together alleviate the local trapping problem that plagues conventional LMMC methods. Specifically, the connected update constructs correlated candidate config-urations through sequential forward noising and reverse denoising trajectories. By contrast, the disconnected up-date performed via NMCMC generates fully independent 9proposals through VAN sampling. Interestingly, the con-nected update bears close connections to both LMMC and the disconnected update. Within the connected-update framework, the forward noising process can be interpreted as a sequence of single-spin flips in LMMC, while the reverse denoising process acts as a weakened variant of the disconnected update and recovers the full disconnected update in the limit t → ∞ .Finally, we discuss potential extensions of our work for future research. First, the current framework can be extended to more complex spin systems to verify the generalization ability of our diffusion model beyond clas-sical ferromagnetic Ising models. Second, in addition to the tau-leaping adopted in this paper, advanced acceler-ation techniques such as diffusion model distillation and enhanced tau-leaping schemes [52, 53] can be incorpo-rated to accelerate the denoising process. Third, efficient numerical simulation of such stochastic dynamical pro-cesses can be extended to advance quantum generative models [54]. Overall, our framework explicitly captures the full distribution dynamics of diffusion, which suggests preliminary directions for subsequent work on model in-terpretability and architectural optimization. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge Online Club Nanothermodynamica for helpful discussions. This work is supported by Project 12322501, 12575035 of National Natural Science Foun-dation of China, and 2026NSFSCZY0124 of the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province. The HPC is supported by the Center for HPC at University of Elec-tronic Science and Technology of China. 

> DATA AVAILABILITY

The authors declare that the data supporting this study are available within the paper. A PyTorch code implementation of the present algorithm is openly avail-able on GitHub [GitHub Repository]. 

> Appendix A: Notation

The key mathematical notations employed throughout this work are defined in Table I.                                   

> TABLE I. Explanations of mathematical symbols
> Symbol Explanation
> SDiscrete state space
> tTime step
> DSystem size
> NBatch size
> EEnergy function
> mAbsolute magnetization per site
> ZPartition function
> FFree energy
> WMarkov generator
> wTransition rate
> REscape rate
> QTransition matrix
> TTemperature of the system
> βInverse temperature β=1
> Tof the system
> π(y|x)Transition probability from xto yuNoisy (latent) spin configuration ∆tDiffusion time step, ∆ t=tk−tk−1
> CCorrelation coefficient
> σiSpin variable, the direction of the i-th spin
> σSpin configuration
> Appendix B: Masked autoencoder for distribution estimation

In this work, we adopt the masked autoencoder for distribution estimation (MADE) [55] to model two- and three-dimensional Ising models. For a standard L-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP), the forward propagation formulation is defined as: 

hl+1 = σ  W lhl + bl (B1) where h0 = x refers to the flattened lattice spin vector, 

hL denotes the final output of the network, and σ(·) is the nonlinear activation function. To impose autoregressive constraints on the spin lat-tice configurations, fixed block-wise binary mask matri-ces are applied to the weight matrices of all linear lay-ers via element-wise Hadamard products, which blocks the redundant connection mappings between individual spins. The forward propagation of the masked layers is then formulated as 

hl+1 =  W l ⊙ M l σ hl + bl, (B2) where ⊙ denotes the element-wise Hadamard product and M l is a fixed binary mask of the same shape as 

W l. Two categories of triangular masks are constructed for different network layers: the input projection layer adopts an exclusive strictly lower-triangular mask, Tij =1 for i > j , which excludes the diagonal and eliminates the self-dependency of each spin; the remaining masked 10 FIG. 7. Feasibility validation of the tau-leaping method for accelerating the denoising process. (a) Results for a     

> D= 16 ×16 2D Ising model: we investigate the effects of different tau leaping steps with a fixed total simulation length of 50 denoising steps. Left y-axis shows mean energy per site after denoising as a function of jump step, right y-axis shows mean magnetization per site; solid curves are noised-denoised samples using the tau-leaping procedure (30 repeats with 200 samples), and dashed horizontal lines indicate baseline values computed from initial samples. (b) Analogous experiment on a 4 ×4×4 3D Ising model. Together the panels illustrate the behavior of tau-leaping in our discrete diffusion model, and we select the jump step where the solid and dashed curves show the closest agreement as the optimal leap duration.

layers utilize an inclusive lower-triangular mask, Tij = 1 for i ≥ j, which keeps the diagonal and preserves a valid sequential autoregressive dependency order. Since both patterns are lower-triangular in the site index, no spin can receive information from a spin of larger index, which is consistent with the autoregressive factorization. Regarding network hyper-parameters, we configure the depth and width conditioned on the lattice dimensions. We set net depth = 3 and net width = 32 for the two-dimensional Ising model, while net depth = 4 and net width = 16 are adopted for the three-dimensional Ising model. Our VAN is compatible with Adam opti-mizer [56] and natural gradient descent [57], which can be incorporated into the parameter update phase to ef-fectively accelerate convergence during model training. In practical training configurations, Adam generally re-quires a small learning rate, typically set to 10 −4 or 10 −5,while natural gradient descent allows a relatively higher learning rate of 10 −2.

> Appendix C: Optimal leap duration for tau-leaping

This appendix explains the principle for determining the optimal leap duration used in the tau-leaping Alg. 2, which controls the trade-off between numerical precision and computational efficiency in stochastic simulations of the denoising process. In our discrete diffusion model, we discretize the continuous-time Markovian dynamics of the forward noising process with fixed-size jump intervals and adopt a VAN to learn the probability distribution at each time step, which means that the exact transition rates of the denoising process are kept constant within each individual jump interval. In Fig. 7, we illustrate the procedure to identify the optimal jump-step size of tau-leaping applied to the denoising process of two- and three-dimensional Ising models. Since the noising process relies on Euler approximation fitting, a greater deviation between the adopted value τ and the optimal leap dura-tion will lead to lower denoising accuracy. For scenarios that require high precision, it can be difficult to select the appropriate τ to keep the final results within an accept-able accuracy range. When we do not find a suitable τ

to keep numerical errors within acceptable limits, Euler-discretized denoising serves as a reliable alternative. 

> Appendix D: Sampling algorithm

This appendix presents the full pseudocodes of multi-ple baseline and reference sampling algorithms discussed in the main text, including the standard local Metropolis Monte Carlo (LMMC), the neural Markov chain Monte Carlo (NMCMC), and the Wolff cluster algorithm. The Wolff cluster algorithm, proposed in 1989 [58], is a highly efficient single-cluster Monte Carlo method. Its single-cluster update distinguishes it from the closely related Swendsen–Wang (SW) algorithm [59]. The primary ad-vantage of the Wolff algorithm is its ability to suppress critical slowing down near second-order phase transitions. In traditional algorithms such as Metropolis sampling, autocorrelation times increase rapidly near phase tran-sitions, drastically reducing sampling efficiency. Sam-ples generated by the Wolff cluster algorithm are used to compute mean energy and magnetization per site, which serve as baseline values for comparison in this work. Despite its efficiency for critical sampling, the Wolff cluster algorithm exhibits inherent limitations that re-strict its general applicability across diverse spin systems and temperature regimes. First, its underlying cluster-11 building principle is theoretically tailored to ferromag-netic systems with uniform short-range couplings. Sec-ond, the cluster construction strategy intrinsically relies on specific symmetry properties and structured spin in-teractions, which further limits its adaptability to generic disordered or asymmetric spin systems. 

Algorithm 3 Wolff Cluster Algorithm 

Step 1. Initialize the cluster and stack: 

• Uniformly select a random lattice site i.

• Initialize the cluster set: C = {i}.

• Create an empty stack and push site i onto the stack. 

Step 2. Grow the cluster using the stack: 

• While the stack is not empty, pop a site j from the stack. 

• Traverse each nearest neighbor k ∈ Uj of site j.

• For each neighbor k satisfying σk = σj and k / ∈ C :

– Add k to the cluster C with probability 

pk = 1 − e−2β ,

– Push the successfully added site k into the stack. 

Step 3. Flip all spins in the cluster: 

σj → − σj ∀j ∈ C 

Algorithm 4 Standard local Metropolis Monte Carlo (LMMC) 

Step 1. Propose a new configuration by flipping the spin of a randomly chosen site: 

σi → − σi;

Step 2. Calculate the energy difference between the new and current configurations: ∆E = E(σ′) − E(σ)

Step 3. Accept the move with probability: Acc[ σ → σ′] = min 

h

1, e −β∆E i

,

Accept σ′ as the new configuration σ(t+1) = σ′ if the transi-tion is accepted; otherwise, keep the original state σ(t + 1) = 

σ for the next iteration. 

Algorithm 5 Neural Markov Chain Monte Carlo (NMCMC) 

Step 1. Initialize the lattice spin configuration σ and adopt a fixed pre-trained neural generator P θ 

> 0

(·). 

Step 2. Propose a fully independent candidate spin configu-ration σ′ directly sampled from the neural generative distri-bution: 

σ′ ∼ P θ 

> 0

(σ′).

Step 3. Evaluate the Metropolis–Hastings acceptance prob-ability based on the neural prior distribution and Boltzmann weight to satisfy detailed balance: Acc[ σ → σ′] = min 

"

1, P θ 

> 0

(σ) · e−βE (σ′)

P θ 

> 0

(σ′) · e−βE (σ)

#

.

Accept σ′ as the new configuration σ(t+1) = σ′ if the transi-tion is accepted; otherwise, keep the original state σ(t + 1) = 

σ for the next iteration. [1] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, Deep unsupervised learning using nonequi-librium thermodynamics, in International conference on machine learning (pmlr, 2015) pp. 2256–2265. [2] Y. Bahri, J. Kadmon, J. Pennington, S. S. Schoenholz, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Ganguli, Statistical mechanics of deep learning, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matt. Phys. 11 ,501 (2020). [3] L. Yang, Z. Zhang, Y. Song, S. Hong, R. Xu, Y. Zhao, W. Zhang, B. Cui, and M.-H. Yang, Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods and applications, ACM Comput. Surv. 56 , 1 (2023). [4] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion prob-abilistic models, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33 , 6840 (2020). [5] G. Batzolis, J. Stanczuk, C.-B. Sch¨ onlieb, and C. Et-mann, Conditional image generation with score-based diffusion models, arXiv:2111.13606 (2021). [6] J. Ho, C. Saharia, W. Chan, D. J. Fleet, M. Norouzi, and T. Salimans, Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 23 , 1 (2022). [7] F. Schneider, Archisound: Audio generation with diffu-sion, arXiv:2301.13267 (2023). [8] J.-M. Lemercier, J. Richter, S. Welker, E. Moliner, V. V¨ alim¨ aki, and T. Gerkmann, Diffusion models for au-dio restoration: A review, IEEE Signal Processing Mag-azine 41 , 72 (2025). [9] J. Austin, D. D. Johnson, J. Ho, D. Tarlow, and R. Van Den Berg, Structured denoising diffusion models in dis-crete state-spaces, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 34 ,17981 (2021). [10] A. Lou, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, Discrete diffusion mod-eling by estimating the ratios of the data distribution, arXiv:2310.16834 (2023). [11] M. Arriola, A. Gokaslan, J. Chiu, Z. Yang, Z. Qi, J. Han, S. Sahoo, and V. Kuleshov, Block diffusion: Interpolating between autoregressive and diffusion language models, in 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,Vol. 2025 (2025) pp. 50726–50753. [12] R. Yu, Q. Li, and X. Wang, Discrete diffusion in 

12 large language and multimodal models: A survey, arXiv:2506.13759 (2025). [13] T. Kathuria and S. Kumar, Leveraging pretrained lan-guage models as energy functions for glauber dynamics text diffusion, arXiv:2605.04291 (2026). [14] D. Wang, R. Qiu, and Z. Huang, When to commit? to-wards variable-size self-contained blocks for discrete dif-fusion language models, arXiv:2604.23994 (2026). [15] H. Zhou, S. Roy, and R. Gangadharaiah, Steering with-out breaking: Mechanistically informed interventions for discrete diffusion language models, arXiv:2605.10971 (2026). [16] N. Gruver, S. Stanton, N. Frey, T. G. Rudner, I. Hotzel, J. Lafrance-Vanasse, A. Rajpal, K. Cho, and A. G. Wil-son, Protein design with guided discrete diffusion, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 , 12489 (2023). [17] A. Sarkar, Z. Tang, C. Zhao, and P. K. Koo, Designing dna with tunable regulatory activity using discrete diffu-sion, bioRxiv , 2024 (2024). [18] L. de Groot, R. J. A. Kuiper, and A. Bagheri, A sur-vey of discrete diffusion for text and genomic sequence generation, in The 37th Benelux Conference on Artificial Intelligence and the 34th Belgian Dutch Conference on Machine Learning .[19] C. Wang, M. Uehara, Y. He, A. Wang, A. Lal, T. Jaakkola, S. Levine, A. Regev, H. Wang, and T. Bian-calani, Fine-tuning discrete diffusion models via reward optimization with applications to dna and protein de-sign, in International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , Vol. 2025 (2025) pp. 47871–47899. [20] S. Sanokowski, W. Berghammer, H. Wang, M. En-nemoser, S. Hochreiter, and S. Lehner, Scalable discrete diffusion samplers: Combinatorial optimization and sta-tistical physics, in International Conference on Learning Representations , Vol. 2025 (2025) pp. 87053–87082. [21] N. S. Singh, M. Mohseni-Rajaee, S. Niazi, and K. Y. Camsari, From independent to correlated diffusion: Gen-eralized generative modeling with probabilistic comput-ers, arXiv:2603.27996 (2026). [22] Y. Zhu, W. Guo, J. Choi, G.-H. Liu, Y. Chen, and M. Tao, Mdns: Masked diffusion neural sampler via stochastic optimal control, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 38 , 35260 (2025). [23] V. De Bortoli, J. Thornton, J. Heng, and A. Doucet, Diffusion schr¨ odinger bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 34 , 17695 (2021). [24] L. Causer, G. M. Rotskoff, and J. P. Garrahan, Discrete generative diffusion models without stochastic differen-tial equations: A tensor network approach, Phys. Rev. E 

111 , 025302 (2025). [25] D. Wu, L. Wang, and P. Zhang, Solving statistical me-chanics using variational autoregressive networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 , 080602 (2019). [26] L. Zhong, W. Duan, J. Liu, P. Zhang, and Y. Tang, Scalable physics-inspired transformers for spin glasses, arXiv:2606.22984 (2026). [27] Y. Tang, J. Weng, and P. Zhang, Neural-network solu-tions to stochastic reaction networks, Nat. Mach. Intell. 

5, 376 (2023). [28] J. Weng, X. Zhu, J. Liu, L. L¨ u, P. Zhang, and Y. Tang, Tracking large chemical reaction networks and rare events by neural networks, arXiv:2512.10309 (2025). [29] J.-E. Shin, A. J. Riesselman, A. W. Kollasch, C. McMa-hon, E. Simon, C. Sander, A. Manglik, A. C. Kruse, and D. S. Marks, Protein design and variant prediction us-ing autoregressive generative models, Nat. Commun. 12 ,2403 (2021). [30] G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks, Science 

355 , 602 (2017). [31] O. Sharir, Y. Levine, N. Wies, G. Carleo, and A. Shashua, Deep autoregressive models for the efficient variational simulation of many-body quantum systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 , 020503 (2020). [32] D. Luo, Z. Chen, J. Carrasquilla, and B. K. Clark, Au-toregressive neural network for simulating open quantum systems via a probabilistic formulation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

128 , 090501 (2022). [33] D. Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechan-ics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1987). [34] L. M. Del Bono, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and F. Zamponi, Performance of machine-learning-assisted monte carlo in sampling from simple statistical physics models, Phys. Rev. E 112 , 045307 (2025). [35] L. M. Del Bono, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and F. Zam-poni, Demonstrating real advantage of machine learning– enhanced monte carlo for combinatorial optimization, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 123 , e2534768123 (2026). [36] M. Levin and C. P. Nave, Tensor renormalization group approach to two-dimensional classical lattice models, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 , 120601 (2007). [37] Z.-Y. Xie, H.-C. Jiang, Q. N. Chen, Z.-Y. Weng, and T. Xiang, Second renormalization of tensor-network states, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 , 160601 (2009). [38] N. Ketkar and J. Moolayil, Convolutional neural net-works, in Deep learning with Python: learn best practices of deep learning models with PyTorch (Springer, 2021) pp. 197–242. [39] P. Mehta, M. Bukov, C.-H. Wang, A. G. Day, C. Richard-son, C. K. Fisher, and D. J. Schwab, A high-bias, low-variance introduction to machine learning for physicists, Phys. Rep. 810 , 1 (2019). [40] B. McNaughton, M. Miloˇ sevi´ c, A. Perali, and S. Pilati, Boosting monte carlo simulations of spin glasses using au-toregressive neural networks, Phys. Rev. E 101 , 053312 (2020). [41] I. Biazzo, D. Wu, and G. Carleo, Sparse autoregressive neural networks for classical spin systems, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 5, 025074 (2024). [42] Y. Tang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, and P. Zhang, Learn-ing nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and dynamical phase transitions, Nat. Commun. 15 , 1117 (2024). [43] H. Sun, L. Yu, B. Dai, D. Schuurmans, and H. Dai, Score-based continuous-time discrete diffusion models, arXiv:2211.16750 (2022). [44] D. T. Gillespie, Approximate accelerated stochastic sim-ulation of chemically reacting systems, J. Chem. Phys. 

115 , 1716 (2001). [45] Y. Cao, D. T. Gillespie, and L. R. Petzold, Avoiding negative populations in explicit poisson tau-leaping, J. Chem. Phys. 123 (2005). [46] Y. Cao, D. T. Gillespie, and L. R. Petzold, Efficient step size selection for the tau-leaping simulation method, J. Chem. Phys. 124 (2006). [47] A. Campbell, J. Benton, V. De Bortoli, T. Rainforth, G. Deligiannidis, and A. Doucet, A continuous time framework for discrete denoising models, Adv. Neural Inf. 

13 Process. Syst. 35 , 28266 (2022). [48] D. T. Gillespie, A general method for numerically simu-lating the stochastic time evolution of coupled chemical reactions, J. Comput. Phys. 22 , 403 (1976). [49] D. T. Gillespie, Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions, J. Phys. Chem. 81 , 2340 (1977). [50] N. T. Hunt-Smith, W. Melnitchouk, F. Ringer, N. Sato, A. W. Thomas, and M. J. White, Accelerating markov chain monte carlo sampling with diffusion models, Com-put. Phys. Commun. 296 , 109059 (2024). [51] H. Chen, S. Liu, and J. Yang, Markov chain monte carlo with diffusion paths, arXiv:2607.11631 (2026). [52] Y. Ren, H. Chen, Y. Zhu, W. Guo, Y. Chen, G. M. Rotskoff, M. Tao, and L. Ying, Fast solvers for discrete diffusion models: Theory and applications of high-order algorithms, arXiv:2502.00234 (2025). [53] Y. Yao, H. Zhou, A. Han, W. Huang, and M. Sugiyama, Accelerating discrete diffusion models with parallel-in-time sampling, arXiv:2607.00773 (2026). [54] Z. Cui, P. Zhang, and Y. Tang, Quantum flow matching, PRX Intelligence 1, 013009 (2026). [55] M. Germain, K. Gregor, I. Murray, and H. Larochelle, Made: Masked autoencoder for distribution estimation, in International conference on machine learning (PMLR, 2015) pp. 881–889. [56] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). [57] J. Liu, Y. Tang, and P. Zhang, Efficient optimization of variational autoregressive networks with natural gradi-ent, Phys. Rev. E 111 , 025304 (2025). [58] U. Wolff, Collective monte carlo updating for spin sys-tems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 , 361 (1989). [59] R. H. Swendsen and J.-S. Wang, Nonuniversal critical dynamics in monte carlo simulations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

58 , 86 (1987). 

14