Title: Co-generation of Layout and Shape from Text via Autoregressive 3D Diffusion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16552v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:19:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Co-generation of Layout and Shape from Text via Autoregressive 3D Diffusion 

Zhenggang Tang 1,2∗, Yuehao Wang 1,3∗, Yuchen Fan 1, Jun-Kun Chen 1,2, Yu-Ying Yeh 1, Kihyuk Sohn 1,

Zhangyang Wang 3, Qixing Huang 3, Alexander Schwing 2, Rakesh Ranjan 1, Dilin Wang 1,†, Zhicheng Yan 1,†

> 1

Meta Reality Labs, 2University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 3University of Texas at Austin 

> ∗

equal contribution , †project lead 

Recent text-to-scene generation approaches largely reduced the manual efforts required to create 3D scenes. However, their focus is either to generate a scene layout or to generate objects, and few generate both. The generated scene layout is often simple even with LLM’s help. Moreover, the generated scene is often inconsistent with the text input that contains non-trivial descriptions of the shape, appearance, and spatial arrangement of the objects. We present a new paradigm of sequential text-to-scene generation and propose a novel generative model for interactive scene creation. At the core is a 3D Autoregressive Diffusion model 3D-ARD+, which unifies the autoregressive generation over a multimodal token sequence and diffusion generation of next-object 3D latents. To generate the next object, the model uses one autoregressive step to generate the coarse-grained 3D latents in the scene space, conditioned on both the current seen text instructions and already synthesized 3D scene. It then uses a second step to generate the 3D latents in the smaller object space, which can be decoded into fine-grained object geometry and appearance. We curate a large dataset of 230K indoor scenes with paired text instructions for training. We evaluate 7B 3D-ARD+ on challenging scenes, and showcase the model can generate and place objects following non-trivial spatial layout and semantics prescribed by the text instructions. 1. Po sition the bed frame                             

> at the center of the scene.
> 2. Place the quilt
> over the bed and the
> carpet under the bed.
> 3.Place the light modern
> nightstand with drawers
> on the carpet, to the
> left side of the bed
> 4. Place the modern nightstand with drawers
> on the carpet, to the right side of the bed
> 5. Position the light -blue
> table lamp on the top surface
> of the left nightstand,
> towards its back -left corner
> 6. Position the light -blue
> table lamp on the top surface
> of the right nightstand,
> towards its back -right corner
> 7. Arrange the decorative
> floral arrangement on the duvet
> of the bed, towards the foot of
> the bed

Figure 1 We present a 3D Autoregressive Diffusion model 3D-ARD+ to sequentially generate 3D objects from detailed text instructions, which not only describe the object shape and appearance, but also prescribe complex spatial relations between objects. 3D-ARD+ model generates a bedroom scene ( left : occupancy voxel, right : appearance) precisely following the text instructions. 

## 1 Introduction 

The creation of immersive 3D scenes is crucial in gaming (UKCMA., 2022; Bhat et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025), virtual reality (Siddiqui et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a, 2025c), and simulation for embodied AI (Yang et al., 2024c,b; Nasiriany et al., 2024; Deitke et al., 2022; Szot et al., 2021). This scene creation process is often interactive, where the user can compose a scene by sequentially adding objects with custom shape, appearance, and spatial arrangement. Conventional workflows (Amirkhanov et al., 2025; Schönberger 1

> arXiv:2604.16552v1 [cs.CV] 17 Apr 2026

et al., 2016) often involve a time-consuming process that requires 3D artists to manually compose the scene, create detailed object geometry, and set up texture mapping. To reduce manual efforts, various text-to-scene approaches are proposed to synthesize 3D scenes from text input (Yang et al., 2024c; Li et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2024a; Bokhovkin et al., 2025; Ling et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025b; Yang et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025), including models for layout generation (Tang et al., 2024), and object generation conditioned on layout (Zhang et al., 2024b; Hu et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024). However, fewer methods generate both (Vilesov et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2025). For scene layout generation, earlier methods generate scene layout natively, but are limited to the layout of large objects only ( e.g . sofa) and simple spatial relations, such as 2D layout (Fang et al., 2025) and basic relations ( e.g . a chair next to the table ) (Tang et al., 2024; Vilesov et al., 2023). They often do not handle more complex spatial relations, such as Position the table lamp on the top surface of the right nightstand, towards its back-right corner (Figure 1). More recent methods (Zhang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2025b; Zhou et al., 2025b; Feng et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024c; Li et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2025) exploit LLM (Hurst et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022) to extract scene information from text input and generate a rough layout, which, however, often deviates from the text description, does not satisfy spatial relations, and needs further heuristic optimization based on spatial constraints and object interactions ( e.g . Scene motif in (Pun et al., 2025), refinement in AnyHome (Fu et al., 2024)). To generate objects conditioned on the scene layout, simple methods retrieve 3D assets from external sources (Tang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b; Ling et al., 2025), which, however, often leads to the final scene inconsistent with the textual description. Advanced methods distill 3D representation from multi-view 2D images (Yang et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Vilesov et al., 2023) or decode 3D representation from 3D latent codes generated by diffusion models (Wu et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024). However, generated objects are often limited to a predefined set of object categories (Fang et al., 2025; Bokhovkin et al., 2025; Yan et al., 2024) or lack geometric details compared to text input (Wu et al., 2024). To support the interactive scene creation with detailed object shape and appearance, we propose a novel 3D AutoRegressive Diffusion model (3D-ARD+) to natively generate objects with diverse shapes and non-trivial spatial arrangements according to the sequential text input. When the text input prescribes fine details about the shape, appearance, and spatial relations of objects, we show that it is challenging for existing approaches, while our 3D-ARD+ model performs significantly better. The 3D-ARD+ model processes the text instructions sequentially. Each text instruction describes the shape, appearance and placement of a new object, and our 3D-ARD+ model autoregressively generates the placement, fine-grained geometry, and appearance of the new object. Under the hood, for each text instruction, our model processes the text tokens encoded from all seen text input, and the 3D latents (Xiang et al., 2025) of the current scene to predict the 3D latents of the next object in the large scene. A subsequent generation step is used to generate the 3D latents of the new object in the smaller object space, which can be decoded into fine-grained 3D Gaussians. The newly generated object is tokenized and appended to the multimodal token sequence to condition the future object generation in an autoregressive manner. The 3D-ARD+ model adopts the DiT transformer architecture (Peebles and Xie, 2023) with causal attention between text- and 3D tokens, and unrestricted attention between 3D tokens. To train the 3D-ARD+ model, we curated a proprietary dataset consisting of 230K indoor scenes. We prompt a VLM to generate step-by-step text instructions to mimic the scene creation process. On the evaluation set, which contains 50 sets of text instructions for composing non-trivial multi-object scenes, we extensively compare our 3D-ARD+ model with several competing methods (Huang et al., 2025b; Xiang et al., 2025), and validate the 3D-ARD+ model performs significantly better in preserving the spatial relations and generating object geometry and appearance, even when object scale varies largely. We summarize our contributions as follows: 

• We present a new paradigm for compositional text-to-3D generation through an autoregressive 3D diffusion transformer, facilitating sequential object placement to synthesize complex scenes. 

• We propose a co-generation approach of layout and shape based on our autoregressive 3D diffusion modeling to achieve fine-grained generation results. 2Multi -mod al Transformer  

> Text Tokenizer
> Instruction 1
> Occupancy
> Volume of
> Object 1
> 3D VAE Latents

…    

> Latents
> 3D Asset
> 𝜖 𝑡 1
> 3D VAE Encoder,
> Noise Injection
> 3D VAE Encoder,
> Patchification
> Text Tokenizer 3D VAE Encoder,
> Noise Injection
> 𝜖 𝑡 2
> Occupancy
> Volume of
> Object 2
> 3D VAE Latents
> <|BOS|> Place
> the tall display
> pedestal at
> center. <|EOS|>
> Instruction 2
> <|BOS|>
> Position the
> plant on the top
> surface. <|EOS|>
> 3D VAE
> Decoder
> 3DGS
> Decoder
> Text Tokens
> Und. Tokens
> Gen. Tokens Figure 2 Overview of 3D-ARD model for coarse-grained scene generation. Left

: at training time, the model takes text tokens, 3D understanding tokens, and noised 3D generation tokens as input, and predicts a time-dependent noise. 

> Right

: at inference time, the model iteratively transforms a random noise into 3D latents, which can be decoded by 3D VAE decoder and 3D Gaussian (3DGS) decoder to generate a 3D object for each step. 

• We develop a data pipeline to collect and process a large dataset of 230K indoor scenes with paired sequential text-scene data, enabling large-scale training of our 3D generation model. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Text-to-3D Generation 

Early Text-to-3D approaches generate 3D objects by distilling 2D diffusion priors (Rombach et al., 2022; Peebles and Xie, 2023), without any 3D training data, including DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2023), Luciddreamer (Wang et al., 2023b), and many others (Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhu et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024). Multi-view diffusion models (Shi et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2024; Long et al., 2024) directly generate pose-consistent image views, which can be used to reconstruct 3D objects. Recent 3D generative models (Nichol et al., 2022; Jun and Nichol, 2023; Xiang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024a) learn to directly map text to 3D latents or explicit 3D representations but are not capable of distinguishing individual objects and preserving the spatial arrangement prescribed in the text. It is still challenging to apply such Text-to-3D approaches to the task of interactive multi-object scene generation, where the user still needs to manually place the generated individual objects into the 3D scene. 

2.2 3D Indoor Scene Generation 

Indoor scene generation approaches often leverage LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Hurst et al., 2024), 2D (Podell et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022), and 3D generative models (Poole et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2025). While some are focused on scene layout generation, others focused on generating objects or both. For scene layout generation, autoregressive (Paschalidou et al., 2021) and diffusion (Tang et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2025) models are often used to generate a scene code and 3D object attributes. CG3D (Vilesov et al., 2023) uses a diffusion model for compositional 3D object generation, but is often limited to modeling simple spatial relations. With the tremendous advances in LLMs, many work exploit them for scene layout generation (Feng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2025b; Zhou et al., 2025b; Yang et al., 2024c; Li et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2025; Çelen et al., 2024; Ran et al., 2025). Although LLMs improve the scene diversity, the result is often not well aligned with the text input and requires further optimizations (Yang et al., 2024c; Çelen et al., 2024; Ran et al., 2025). AnyHome (Fu et al., 2024) prompts the LLM to convert the input text into structured representations, but still rectifies the room layout by Score Distillation Sampling (Poole et al., 2023). HSM (Pun et al., 2025) uses a VLM to extract room type and objects from the text, but still needs multiple steps to generate the final layout, such as extracting support region, generating scene motif and optimizing the room layout. Our 3D-ARD+ model natively generates the next object conditioned on the seen text instructions and already generated objects, and thus places the next object in the scene consistent with the input. 3To create 3D objects in the scene, (Tang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b; Ling et al., 2025) retrieve 3D assets from asset libraries (Deitke et al., 2023b,a), but it lacks coherence to text instruction or between objects. Instead, recent works generate 3D objects (Yang et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Vilesov et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2025; Bokhovkin et al., 2025). BlockFusion (Wu et al., 2024) and SceneFactor (Bokhovkin et al., 2025) generate 3D objects holistically as a scene, thus lacking geometric details for individual objects, and requiring further refinement. SceneCraft (Yang et al., 2024a) reconstructs 3D NeRF representation from multi-view images. CG3D (Vilesov et al., 2023), DreamScene (Li et al., 2024) generate 3D objects with variants of score distillation sampling (Poole et al., 2023). In contrast, our 3D-ARD+ generates 3D latents, which can be decoded into 3D representation ( e.g ., 3D Gaussian) of individual objects in the scene step-by-step, thereby maintaining the fine-grained details and high fidelity. With the rise of video diffusion models (VDMs), generating 3D scenes from images or videos has been studied. ArtiScene (Gu et al., 2025) extracts 3D attributes from isometric scene layouts and generates 3D objects via image-to-3D model. StarGen (Zhai et al., 2025), HunyuanWorld-Voyager (Huang et al., 2025a) propose long-range, pose-controllable VDMs whose frames can be turned into 3D Gaussian splats. However, these two-stage approaches are susceptible to error accumulation, and the quality of 3D reconstruction is limited by the fidelity of the intermediate images or videos. 

2.3 Multimodal Generative Models 

Since the success of visual generation models based on the text prompt (Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2023), it has been studied to generate visual contents beyond the text input, such as reference images. Earlier work focused on building a specialized model for each set of reference images (Gal et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023). However, such approaches are expensive and limited to making reference to only a few concepts. Following the success of LLMs, multimodal generative models are introduced (Hurst et al., 2024; Comanici et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025a; Team, 2024; Shi et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2025; Pan et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2025a; Deng et al., 2025). Compared to earlier works based on fine-tuning, multimodal generative models are fast and flexible, as they take multimodal inputs ( e.g . reference image) in an in-context manner to generate multimodal outputs. Chameleon (Team, 2024), ILLUME (Wang et al., 2025a), MUSE-VL (Xie et al., 2025), and Janus-family (Wu et al., 2025a; Chen et al., 2025) employ a discrete image tokenizer so that both text and vision modalities can be modeled using a single autoregressive transformer. On the other hand, Transfusion (Zhou et al., 2025a), LMfusion (Shi et al., 2024a), MetaQuery (Pan et al., 2025) and Bagel (Deng et al., 2025) develop models by combining the best of both worlds, where the discrete ( e.g . text) token is processed using next-token prediction, while the continuous ( e.g . image) token is processed via diffusion. The proposed 3D-ARD+ is inspired by the latter that combines next-token prediction and diffusion for multimodal generation, but is designed to generate 3D representation directly from our autoregressive-diffusion model. 

## 3 Method 

We tackle the task of sequential text-to-scene generation, and the goal is to generate individual objects in a multi-step process based on sequential text instructions, which often prescribes the shape, appearance, functional use and spatial arrangement of the new object at each step. We do not generate walls, floors and ceilings since they can be easily generated by prior methods (Raistrick et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024c; Fu et al., 2024; Pun et al., 2025). We propose a novel 3D Autoregressive Diffusion model 3D-ARD for coarse-grained scene generation (Figure 2), and further extend it into a 3D-ARD+ model for fine-grained scene generation (Figure 4). Both are trained using a diffusion objective (Liu et al., 2023). We address three key challenges below. 1) : How to build a model to generate the next object with coarse shape and appearance conditioned on the text input and the already synthesized 3D scene (if any)? In Section 3.1, we present the 3D-ARD model architecture. 2) : How to generate objects with fine geometric details and appearance when the object size varies and the scene is often much larger? In Section 3.2, we present an extended 3D-ARD+ model for refining the object geometry using 4extra refinement steps. 3) The lack of training data with paired scene and sequential text input . In Section 3.3, we introduce our data pipeline to curate a large-scale indoor scene dataset with paired text instructions. 

3.1 3D-ARD: Autoregressive 3D Diffusion 

We denote the sequential text instructions as {Tt}Nt=1 where N is the total steps. The text instruction Tt

for generating the next object often not only describes the shape and appearance of the object, but also its spatial arrangement. An example from Figure 1 is “Position the light-blue table lamp on the top surface of the right nightstand, towards its back-right corner.” Therefore, the next-object generation should be conditioned on all seen text instructions and the already synthesized 3D objects (if any). Inspired by Transfusion (Zhou et al., 2025a), we build a multi-modal transformer model that simultaneously processes text tokens XTt , 3D understanding tokens XUt and 3D generation tokens XGt at each step t. 

> Text tokens.

We tokenize the text string Tt into a sequence of discrete tokens with the BAGEL tokenizer (Deng et al., 2025), and use standard embedding layers to convert tokens into vectors Embed (Tt) of dimension C.At each step, we concatenate text tokens of all seen text instructions to obtain XTt . 

> 3D understanding tokens.

At training time, for each of the existing objects {Ot′ }t−1 

> t′=1

in the step t, we take a 3D binary volume Vt′ ∈ { 0, 1}M ×M ×M , which represents the occupancy of object Ot′ in the whole scene, and use a VAE encoder to encode it into low-resolution 3D latents St′ ∈ RD×D×D×CS . To reduce the number of tokens, we process St′ using a patchification layer with non-overlapping patches of size 2, followed by a linear projection layer to align with the text embedding dimension C. The 3D understanding tokens XUt include tokens of all existing objects.  

> 3D generation tokens.

Inspired by TRELLIS (Xiang et al., 2025), the occupancy of an object in the scene can be represented by a list of active voxels {pi}Li=1 , where pi is the position index of a voxel, and L the total number of active voxels. The sparse voxels {pi}Li=1 are converted into a dense binary 3D volume V ∈ { 0, 1}M ×M ×M ,which is further encoded by a 3D VAE encoder into low-resolution 3D latents S ∈ RD×D×D×CS . During model training, we obtain the 3D generation tokens in the current step by applying patchification with a patch size of 1 and linearly projecting a noised version of S into XGt . Note the generation tokens will be later denoised and decoded to predict the occupancy of next object in the scene.  

> Training recipe.

We train the 3D-ARD model on a curated training dataset (Section 3.3) with paired scene and sequential text instructions. Over the generation steps {t}, we autoregressively predict the denoised 3D latents of individual objects, which can be decoded into a 3D occupancy volume V in the scene. Unlike Transfusion (Zhou et al., 2025a), which predicts both text token and image patches and thus applies objectives on all output tokens, our goal is to generate the next object in the scene. Therefore, we apply diffusion objective to the denoised 3D generation tokens only. Specifically, we model the 3D latents distribution using the Rectified flow model (Liu et al., 2023), where in the forward pass a noised sample is obtained based on a time-dependent linear interpolation x(s) = (1 − s)x0 + sϵ between a clean sample x0 (which is S in our case) and a random noise ϵ. In the backward pass, the noised sample is denoised according to a time-dependent flow 

v(x, s ), which is approximated by the transformer backbone trained with the flow matching objective below. 

L(θ) = Es, x0,ϵ∥vθ (x, s ) − (ϵ − x0)∥22 (1) where θ denotes the learnable parameters.  

> 3D-ARD transformer.

The majority of the 3D-ARD model’s parameters θ are with the multimodal transformer backbone, which consists of 28 blocks with self-attention (Peebles and Xie, 2023). To explicitly reveal different types of tokens in the sequence, we insert BOS and EOS tokens to denote the beginning and end of text tokens. Similarly, we insert BO3D and EO3D tokens for 3D understanding and generation tokens. We implement a generalized causal attention between three types of input tokens (Figure 3). For text tokens, it uses standard causal attention, including attention to the text tokens and 3D understanding tokens from earlier steps. 5Conditions: 3 D und. tokens of      

> object 1, 2, …, 2t -1
> Scene Space Object Space
> Zoom -in of conditions
> at step 2t -1
> Generation: object generated in
> object space at step 2t Figure 4 Fine-grained object generation in 3D-ARD+ model. 3D-ARD+ model generates 3D latents in the object space to obtain more fine-grained geometry. Text
> 3D Generation
> 3D Understanding
> Figure 3 The generalized causal attention used by 3D-ARD model . Tokens along the horizontal and vertical directions are input and output tokens, respectively.

For 3D understanding tokens, it uses the standard causal attention to text tokens, but unrestricted attention to themselves, allowing every understand-ing token to attend to every other understanding token in the scene. For 3D generation tokens, it uses a standard causal attention to text and 3D understanding tokens, since the generation of next object should be conditioned on all seen text and al-ready synthesized objects. They have unrestricted attention to themselves, allowing every generation token to attend to every other generation token.  

> Model inference.

At inference time, for each text instruction Tt, we first sample a random noise ϵ as 

x(1) , and iteratively follow the approximate flow 

vθ (x, s ), conditioned on all past text tokens and 3D understanding tokens, to update the sample 

x(s) until we obtain a denoised sample x(0) . We decode x(0) into a binary volume V via a 3D VAE decoder to denote the occupancy of the object in the scene. To obtain the geometry and appearance of the final object, we extract the active voxels {pi}Li=1 from 

V , iteratively denoise a randomly initialized noise by running the off-the-shelf TRELLIS 3D VAE decoder based on sparse flow transformer (Xiang et al., 2025) conditioned on the current object text description to obtain the structured latent {(zi, p i)}Li=1 , which can be decoded into 3D Gaussians using the TRELLIS 3DGS decoder (See Figure 1). 

3.2 3D-ARD+: Fine-grained Scene Generation 

Due to computational constraints, the resolution of the generated object in the scene space V ∈ { 0, 1}M ×M ×M

is limited ( M =64 in our experiments), resulting in only coarse-grained object geometry for common objects (Figure 7 Top). To address this limitation, we extend the 3D-ARD model by adding an extra step to generate 3D latents of the same resolution D×D×D in the smaller object space after each current generation step, and the resulting model is referred to as 3D-ARD+ model. It uses a generation process of 2N steps for sequential text instructions {Tt}Nt=1 (Figure 4). Below, we present details on how to prepare tokens at even steps {2t},where fine-grained objects are generated.  

> Text tokens.

At an even step 2t, we take text tokens of the instruction Tt already prepared at the step 2t − 1,as well as two new special tokens BOR and EOR , which denote the beginning and end of refinement text, as the text tokens at the step 2t.6Ergonomic Chair Plant Laptop Table 

2). Captioning 3). Spatial Reasoning 

> In front of the table On the table, left At center

## √

1). Front View Selection 4). Assembly Plan  

> On the table, right 2. Position the ergonomic chair in front of the table 4. Place the plant to the right of the laptop 3. Place the laptop on the left side of the table 1. Place the table at the center Figure 5 Dataset construction pipeline

includes four steps: (1) Front view selection, (2) Captioning, (3) Spatial reasoning, and (4) Generating assembly plan. 

3D understanding tokens. At an even step 2t, we first prepare 3D understanding tokens from all past odd steps {2t′ − 1}tt′=1 as in Section 3.1. For all past even steps {2t′}t−1

> t′=1

, we take the groundtruth dense binary 3D volume V2t′ in the object space, and use a 3D VAE encoder to encode it into a low-resolution 3D latents 

S2t′ . Similar to Section 3.1, latents S2t′ are further patchified and linearly projected to reduce the token numbers and align the feature dimension. 

3D generation tokens. To prepare 3D generation tokens, we take the groundtruth binary occupancy volume V

in the object space, encode it into low-resolution 3D latents S via a 3D VAE encoder, and apply the Rectified Flow time-dependent linear interpolation to obtain a noisy latent. As in Section 3.1, We further patchify the latents with a patch size of 1 and apply a projection to obtain the 3D generation tokens. 

Model training. 3D-ARD+ model at both odd and even generation steps also attaches the conditional flow matching objective (Equation 1) to the denoised 3D generation tokens to train the transformer backbone. 

Model inference. Similarly to the inference of the 3D-ARD model in Section 3.1, the 3D latents generated in the local object space are decoded into a binary occupancy volume V , where the active voxels with normalized coordinates are extracted to be used by the TRELLIS 3D VAE based on sparse flow transformer to generate structured latents. To put the fine occupancy volume in the scene space, we first calculate the bounding box of the coarse one and then transform the fine one accordingly. 

3.3 Dataset Construction 

To enable sequential scene generation, we construct a high-quality indoor dataset with step-wise assembly instructions. The raw data is from a proprietary indoor dataset, which consists of parts of a scene but lacks assembling instructions. To generate the instructions, our data pipeline consists of four main stages (Figure 5). 

Step 1: View selection. Given multi-view renderings of each object group, we leverage a VLM to identify the canonical front view that maximizes visual informativeness while minimizing occlusion. The model analyzes specific cues such as furniture orientation ( e.g . cabinet doors, bed headboards) to determine the optimal viewing angle for subsequent labeling. 

Step 2: Object captioning. For each object in the scene, we generate multi-granularity textual descriptions by presenting the VLM with both the complete scene view and individual object-focused views. The captions capture essential attributes including object type, material properties, color, geometric characteristics, and critically structural elements that support other objects. 

Step 3: Spatial relationship analysis. We incorporate 3D bounding box data (including dimensions, center positions, and spatial extents) to provide a precise geometric context for this spatial reasoning step. Atop-down visualization is also generated to facilitate it. 71 2Object id  3 7 8 9

# …     

> Position a
> brown wooden
> bookshelf at
> the center
> Position astack of
> books on the 2 nd layer
> from the top, within the
> leftmost compartment
> … to the
> right of
> object 2
> … on the top
> layer, to the
> right of object 7
> …on the
> top layer,
> leftmost
> … on the top
> layer, to the
> right of object 8

Final Scene Figure 6 An example of step-by-step generation. Our 3D-ARD+ model closely follows the text instructions and adds a total of 8 stacks of books to different compartments in a bookshelf. 

Step 4: Assembly plan generation. Combining the visual observations, object captions, geometric context, and spatial reasoning, the VLM generates a sequential assembly plan consisting of step-by-step instructions that specifies the placement order from foundational objects to dependent components. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Implementation Details 

We implement our approach in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). We use the dense binary occupancy volume 

V ∈ { 0, 1}M ×M ×M with resolution M =64 to represent the occupancy of objects in the scene space or the smaller object space. An off-the-shelve 3D VAE from TRELLIS (Xiang et al., 2025) is used to encode V

into a low-resolution continuous volume S ∈ RD×D×D×CS , where D = 16 and CS = 8 . All text tokens, 3D understanding tokens, and 3D generation tokens use the feature dimension 128. 

3D-ARD+ model training. We use pre-trained multimodal transformer model from Bagel (Deng et al., 2025), which contains 7B active parameters and 28 self-attention building blocks. We finetune it on our curated indoor data for 120K steps with learning rate 1e − 4 using 128 Nvidia H100 GPUs for a week. The maximum token size per sequence is 20,480. 

3D-ARD+ model inference. KV pairs of text tokens for all seen text instructions are stored in the KV cache (Pope et al., 2022). KV pairs of denoised 3D generation tokens are also stored. We utilize the Euler sampler for generation, employing 50 sampling steps. The CFG coefficient (Ho and Salimans, 2022) is set to 4 for text conditions and 2 for 3D condition tokens, following the configurations in (Deng et al., 2025). 

Indoor training data. Our dataset consists of 230K indoor scenes from typical room types (bedrooms, living rooms, kitchens, dining areas, bathrooms). Each scene contains 2–15 parts with diverse compositions: adjacent furniture ( e.g . bed with nightstands), furniture-object assemblies ( e.g . table with tableware), or grouped small objects. Each scene is normalized together to be within the unit bounding box. Each part has a corresponding assembly instruction (several to 40 words) describing its spatial placement. We also include a single object data with 1M assets in our training data to enrich object-level diversity. 

4.2 Evaluation Settings 

We construct a held-out testing data by filtering out a subset of 50 unseen text instructions in the training data for challenging scene composition tasks. These scenes span diverse room types ( e.g . kitchen, bedroom, living room), varying spatial scales (from groups of large furniture to groups of small objects), and different object counts, ensuring comprehensive coverage of compositional complexity and spatial reasoning challenges. Our evaluation set consists of sequential text instructions captioned by a VLM, as detailed in Section 3.3. See examples in the appendix. 83D-ARD  

> 3D-ARD+ Figure 7 Comparing results from 3D-ARD and 3D-ARD+ models . Top: coarse-grained; Bottom: fine-grained.

4.3 Baselines  

> TRELLIS-text XL.

We choose the largest Text-to-3D model TRELLIS (Xiang et al., 2025) as a baseline, which is open-sourced with 2B parameters. To prepare the text input, we use a VLM to summarize all steps into one instruction.  

> MIDI: Multi-Instance Diffusion.

MIDI (Huang et al., 2025b) is a recent image-to-scene model to generate multi-object scenes by segmenting the scene image using Grounded-SAM (Ren and et al., 2024), and applying a multi-instance diffusion model (Huang et al., 2025b). To prepare the image input, we summarize all text instructions into an overall description of the scene, and use a text-to-image model to generate a scene image.  

> BB.+TRELLIS.

We reuse the 3D bounding boxes in the test set. Then we use the TRELLIS-text XL model to generate 3D objects from object captions, and fit the generated object to the bounding box afterwards.  

> LLM-layout+TRELLIS.

In this baseline, we first use the text instructions to prompt a LLM for generating detailed object captions and predicting 3D bounding boxes. Then we use the TRELLIS-text XL model to generate actual 3D objects from those captions, rescale and position each to fit its bounding box. 

4.4 Qualitative Results  

> 3D-ARD+ sequential generation results.

Figure 6 demonstrates how 3D-ARD+ enables creation of a com-positional scene by following a sequence of text prompts. As shown in the results, 3D-ARD+ follows text instructions at each step, and can generate object shape and appearance close to the text instructions while also placing the object based on the prescribed spatial arrangement.  

> Comparisons with baselines.

In Figure 9, we qualitatively compare our 3D-ARD+ model with four baselines as our primary evaluation. TRELLIS-text XL will hallucinate unrelated objects ( e.g . paper towel in row 1) or generate objects inconsistent with the text input ( e.g . more than expected pillows in row 2). MIDI 

requires an image aligned with the text as the input. We empirically observe that when images generated from text instructions by a VLM are used as input, MIDI may still fail to produce plausible object shapes and placements. See more details in the supplementary. For BB.+TRELLIS , it is difficult to avoid object collision after placing individual objects, generated by TRELLIS-text XL, into the scene according to the groundtruth bounding box ( e.g . row 3). For LLM-layout+TRELLIS , LLM can predict 3D bounding box of individual objects poorly for complex text input ( e.g . row 1 vs. 3). Even the subsequent generation of individual objects by TRELLIS-text XL are plausible, the spatial arrangement in the composed scene still significantly deviates from the text instructions. In contrast, our method successfully captures object types, 9GT. Appearance Generation  Final Scene Generation Input GT. Condition      

> 2) Position the flat -screen computer monitor on the top surface of the main segment of the L -shaped desk, centering it against t he
> back cubicle panel for optimal viewing. 3) Place the ergonomic office chair directly in front of the main desk surface of the L-
> shaped workstation, ensuring it is centrally aligned for comfortable user access and mobility within the workspace.
> 2) Position the long dining bench directly behind and aligned with the longer side of the rectangular dining table. It stands on the
> floor and provides seating along one side of the table. 3) Place the modern dining armchair with a black upholstered bucket s eat in
> front of the rectangular dining table... 4) Place the modern dining armchair with a light blue upholstered bucket seat in fro nt of the
> rectangular dining table …

Figure 8 Conditioned next-object generation. Given the ground-truth fundamental object (table or desk) and subsequent textual instructions, our model generates subsequent objects properly. 

Table 1 Quantitative comparisons on the indoor evaluation set . We report several metrics, including Kernel Dis-tance (Bińkowski et al., 2018) with Inception-v3 (KID) and DINOv2 encoders, CLIP-text, and CLIP-image scores (Rad-ford et al., 2021). 

KID ( ↓) KDD ( ↓) CLIP-text ( ↑) CLIP-image ( ↑) P-FID ( ↓) P-IS ( ↑)MIDI 1.308 98.721 22.607 74.896 17.661 2.281 TRELLIS-text XL 1.543 96.928 22.086 73.306 11.267 2.508 BB.+TRELLIS 1.694 101.287 20.726 66.555 19.430 2.553 LLM-layout+TRELLIS 1.376 88.425 22.645 71.896 12.564 2.435 Ours 1.244 49.021 27.447 76.103 2.837 2.596 

shapes, appearance, and their spatial locations as specified in the text instructions, resulting in meaningful compositional 3D generation. 

Conditioned next-object generation. Our model supports conditioned generation where the first 3D object is given by the user, and subsequent objects are generated based on text prompts. In our implementation, we first convert the input mesh condition into 64 × 64 × 64 grids, and transform the mesh using a user-input layout (specified by translation and rotation matrices) to obtain coarse-level grids. Then, we can encode the grids using our employed 3D VAE and prefill the corresponding 3D tokens with KV caching. After doing this, the subsequent generation will be conditioned on the prefilled 3D tokens of the user input. Figure 8 presents the results of our model for demonstrating this capability. 

4.5 Quantitative Comparisons 

Evaluation metrics. We follow previous work (Xiang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024a) to choose our evaluation metrics. For evaluating the visual quality of generated scenes, we conduct the evaluation of 3D generation on their rendered images. We employ kernel distance metrics, including Kernel Inception Distance (KID) (Bińkowski et al., 2018) using InceptionV3, and Kernel Distance with DINOv2 (KDD) encoders. For each scene in our training set, we randomly place cameras from left, right, front and back views to render images and construct the reference batch with 10K images. Similarly, we render random views for each baseline in the 10 Table 2 Ablation study of object-level training data and patch size, using CLIP-text and P-FID scores. 

Method CLIP-text ( ↑) P-FID ( ↓)w/o object-level training data 24.772 6.238 patch size for gen. tokens = 2 24.647 4.521 Final Model 27.447 2.837 

test set to form the generation batch with 5K images. To measure the consistency between text descriptions and generated scenes, we use CLIP scores, comparing both text and image references. To obtain a single reference text description (rather than a list of instructions) and image for each scene, we first input the textual instructions into a VLM to generate the corresponding images. We then query it to describe these generated images, using the resulting descriptions as reference text prompts. For 3D-level evaluation, we report PointNet++-based FID (P-FID) and Inception Score (P-IS). The reference set consists of 5K randomly sampled test examples, and each model generates 1.5K-1.7K samples using the same test instruction subset. To compute P-FID and P-IS, 4,096 points are randomly sampled from the reference and generated scenes.  

> Results.

We present our quantitative results in Table 1 as a secondary evaluation. Our method consistently outperforms all baseline approaches across every metric, aligning with our visual comparison. Beyond improved distribution alignment with the training data, as measured by KID, KDD, and P-FID, our model also achieves substantial gains in CLIP-Text, CLIP-Image, and P-IS. These metrics are computed independently of the training distribution, indicating that the improvements reflect enhanced generation quality rather than overfitting to the training data domain. 

4.6 Ablation Study   

> Ablating refinement stage (3D-ARD vs. 3D-ARD+).

In Figure 7, we compare the results of 3D-ARD and 3D-ARD+ to illustrate the improvements introduced by the refinement stage. In the left example (the ornament case), we show 3D-ARD+ generates more fine-grained objects with the designed refinement step. The right example (the sofa case) shows that generating appearance directly on coarse geometry is likely to cause artifacts in the resulting texture. In addition, the shape of the pillow after the refinement stage also has smoother geometry, showing the effectiveness of our approach.  

> Ablating object-level data and patch size.

We conduct an ablation study on two key factors that affect generation quality: (1) whether single-object data is included in the training set, and (2) the patch size used for 3D generation tokens in the transformer. All models in this ablation study use the same hyperparameters and model size as our final model described in the main text. Table 2 summarizes the results. The results suggest two main observations. First, even without object-level training data, the model can produce reasonable spatial layouts guided by text instructions, as indicated by competitive CLIP-Text scores. However, the P-FID metric reveals that the generated shapes are of low quality. Second, our experiments show that using a patch size of 2 for generation tokens (the exact setting used for 3D understanding tokens) introduces “patching artifacts”, leading to severe holes in the decoded 3DGS results. Therefore, we adopt a patch size of 1 for generation tokens, which significantly improves the final generation quality. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We present a novel Autoregressive 3D Diffusion model 3D-ARD+ for compositional text-to-3D co-generation of layout and shape. A large-scale indoor scene dataset with paired text instructions is curated to train the 3D-ARD+ model. On a challenging evaluation set, the proposed 3D-ARD+ model significantly outperforms other competing methods in both visual comparisons and quantitative evaluations. Our model can serve as a base model for a series of future post-training work, such as physics-informed supervised fine-tuning for generating more realistic scenes. 11 MIDI  BB. + TRELLIS  LLM Layout 

+ TRELLIS 

TRELLIS -text 

XL 

Ours 

(1) Place the light wood -toned rectangular 

desk unit as the foundational base... 2) Attach 

the light wood -toned open shelving unit  onto 

the left side  of the desk unit's tabletop... 3) 

Insert the flat, rectangular dark gray panel 

into the right section  ...  positioning it directly 

on the desk ...adjacent to  the open shelving... 

1) Place the two -tiered, corner shower caddy 

as the foundational support structure... 2) 

Place the small, round bottle  on the front -left 

side of the lower shelf  of the shower caddy. 3) 

Place the small, cylindrical bottle on the 

back -right side of the lower shelf of the 

shower caddy... 4) Place the tall, cylindrical 

bottle on the  left -front side of the upper shelf 

of the shower caddy. 5)... 6)... 

1) Place the lavish three -seater sofa as the 

foundational element of the scene... 2) 

Position the rectangular decorative throw 

pillow with an ornate, swirling abstract 

pattern ... 3) Place … throw pillow … on the 

sofa's seat  ... 4) Place the second square 

decorative throw pillow with a central 

embroidered floral pattern on the sofa's seat ... 

5) … pillow ...  on the far right section of the 

sofa's seat ... 

1) Place the rectangular nightstand … as the 

foundational furniture piece, providing the 

main surface for other items. 2) Place the 

table lamp ...  on the top surface of the 

nightstand ... 3) Position the rectangular photo 

frame  on the top surface …between the lamp 

and where the plant will be placed . 4) Place 

the decorative potted plant with lush green 

leaves ...  on the top surface of the nightstand, 

... adjacent to the photo frame .

Text Instructions 

1) Place the minimalist rectangular bench 

with its white upholstered top and slim white 

metal legs … green fabric runner , which is 

draped over its right section…. 2) Place the 

first decorative book … onto the green fabric 

runner on the right side of the bench … serve 

as the base for the next stacked item. 3) Stack 

the second decorative book … directly on top 

of the first decorative book …

1) Place the modern side table featuring a 

round, tray -like silver metal top and a 

minimalistic wire metal base as the central 

and foundational element of the scene, 

providing the primary surface for other items. 

2) Position the rectangular book ...  on the top 

surface of the side table, to the left of the 

center . 3) Place the rectangular book ...  on the 

top of the first book ... 

1) Place the dark brown wooden media 

console ... 2) Position the modern flat -screen 

television on the broad top surface  of the dark 

brown wooden media console, ... 3) Place ... 

books  horizontally on the lower left open 

shelf  ..., to the left of the television bay . 4) 

Place ... books  horizontally on the lower right 

open shelf  ..., to the right of the television bay .

5) Arrange ... books  vertically on an upper 

open display shelf  of ... entertainment unit 

Reference Image 

(by a Public VLM) Figure 9 Qualitative comparison . Visual results of our method and existing single-object generation and multi-object generation approaches are presented with corresponding input text instructions and reference images generated by a VLM. Bold text highlights object kinds, italic text shape/appearance descriptions, and underline locations. 

12 Sample 1  Sample 2  Sample 3 

1) Mount the wall -mounted decorative shelf as the primary 

and foundational structure of the scene, ensuring it is level to 

support subsequent items . This shelf provides the flat display 

surface for other objects and implicitly includes the central 

picture frame . 2) Place the decorative potted plant with vibrant 

green leaves and a white pot onto the flat display surface of 

the shelf, positioning it specifically on the left side, to the left 

of where the picture frame is located . 3) Place the second 

decorative potted plant with vibrant green leaves and a white 

pot onto the flat display surface of the shelf, positioning it 

specifically on the right side, to the right of where the picture 

frame is located, mirroring the first plant .

1) Place the dark brown or black nightstand as the 

foundational element of the scene, providing a stable top 

surface that will support the lamp . 2) Position the white 

ceramic table lamp centrally on the top surface of the 

nightstand, ensuring it is stable and ready to provide 

illumination .

1) Place the stylish armchair as the central and foundational 

element of the scene, providing the main seating surface and 

supporting all other items . 2) Position the soft, light grey 

square cushion onto the seating area of the armchair, resting 

against its backrest to provide comfort . 3) Drape the black and 

white houndstooth patterned throw blanket over the left 

armrest of the armchair, with a portion folded onto the seat, to 

serve as a decorative accent .Figure S1 Diversity of generation results. Three samples are generated for each sequence of text instructions, illustrating the variations of output produced by our method. The first-row results are generated via conditioning on the ground-truth geometry of the base object. Results in the second and third rows are generated from scratch. 

# Appendix 

## A More Results 

A.1 Diversity of Generation 

To demonstrate the generative diversity of our model, we provide multiple generations with different random seeds from identical text instructions. Figure S1 shows that given the same prompt, our model produces varied yet semantically consistent results. 

A.2 Additional Qualitative Results 

In addition to the comparisons provided in the main text, Figure S11 presents further generation results produced by our method and various baseline approaches. In the presented cases, our method demonstrates superior visual quality in synthesizing compositional scenes that follow the provided text instructions, outperforming the baseline approaches. Furthermore, several baseline methods, including MIDI, BB. + TRELLIS, and LLM Layout + TRELLIS, fail to generate output for certain instructions (either empty output or crashes when querying models), revealing the instability of the baseline systems. 13 (a) View 0 (b) View 1 (Selected) (c) View 2 (d) View 3          

> Figure S2 View selection example. Given four different viewpoint renderings of the same scene, our method selects View 1 as the canonical front view.
> (a) Part 0 (b) Part 1 (c) Part 2 (d) Part 3
> Figure S3 Normalized input views for object captioning. Each part is extracted and normalized from the selected front view to provide clear, focused views for detailed caption generation.

## B Data Curation Details 

Our data curation pipeline leverages a VLM for all stages of processing, including view selection, object captioning, and assembly plan generation. Below we detail the specific prompts and procedures used at each stage. Throughout this section, we use a nightstand scene as a running example to illustrate each stage of our data curation pipeline. This scene consists of four objects: Part 0 is a blue hydrangea potted plant, Part 1 is a rectangular picture frame, Part 2 is a modern table lamp, and Part 3 is a grey nightstand with a gold base (the foundational furniture piece). 

B.1 View Selection 

To identify the canonical front view from multi-view renderings, we provide the following system instructions along with 4 different viewpoint images. Figure S2 shows an example where our method selects the most informative viewing angle from four candidate views. The complete prompt is shown in Figure S4. 

B.2 Object Captioning 

For each object in the scene, we generate multi-granularity (one in around 20 words, another in around 5 words) textual descriptions. The model receives two types of images: (1) the entire scene view (all_together.png, using the selected front view from Figure S2) showing the complete furniture group, and (2) normalized views of each part (norm_part_x.png) as shown in Figure S3. The complete prompt is shown in Figure S7.  

> B.2.1 Example Generated Captions

Figure S8 shows example captions generated by our pipeline for a nightstand scene. 14 View Selection Prompt  

> System Instruction:

You are an indoor scene analyzer. Given 4 different viewpoint images of the same indoor scene or object group, analyze them carefully. Your task is to identify the front view. The ’front view’ is the most informative viewing angle, showing almost all parts of the main object or scene with minimal occlusion. 

> Domain-specific criteria:

• If the object is a wardrobe or cabinet, the side with doors or visible contents is the front view (note that you should distinguish what is the back side of the wardrobe, and filter this). 

• If it is a bed, the side with pillows and bedside tables should be at the top, farthest away from the camera, receding into the background. 

• If it is a desk or table, the side where the user can most easily interact directly is considered the front view. In this task, you must choose the front view from a slightly top-down perspective (not a perfectly level/straight-on view). The selection should prioritize the angle that would be considered the canonical or primary viewing direction for recognizing or interacting with the scene or object. 

> Analysis format:

1. Whether they include wardrobe, cabinet: True/False 

• If 1 is True, whether the image includes the doors (sometimes the backside looks like doors, should be careful!), whether it includes contents and what contents are they, whether the user is easy to get access to everything of the cabinet or on the table 2. Whether they include beds: True/False 

• If 2 is True, whether there are bedside tables 

• If 2 is True, whether the side with pillows and bedside tables is at the far end: True/False 3. Small objects that you can see from the image 4. If multiple images meet the above requirements, compare and describe them and find the one that meets most  

> User Prompt:

Finally the response should end in this format: “the front view is x”, where x should be 0, 1, 2, 3. Here are the four views: [000.png] [001.png] [002.png] [003.png].  

> Figure S4

View selection prompt used to identify the canonical front view from multi-view renderings. 

B.3 Spatial Relationship Analysis 

To provide precise geometric context for assembly planning, we incorporate 3D bounding box data for each object, including dimensions, center positions, and spatial extents. We also generate a top-down visualization (X-Z plane projection with Y-axis flattened) showing the spatial layout of all objects with numbered labels, as shown in Figure S5. The bounding box data is used in conjunction with visual observations in the subsequent assembly plan generation stage. 

B.4 Assembly Plan Generation 

The assembly plan generation uses a unified prompt that produces two interconnected outputs through a chain-of-thought process: (1) explicit spatial relationship analysis for each part (as described in the previous subsection), and (2) the sequential assembly plan. This two-part output structure encourages the model to first reason about geometric relationships before constructing the assembly sequence, ensuring logical consistency and physically grounded instructions. The VLM receives multiple types of input images to understand both the complete scene context and individual object details, as illustrated in Figure S6: (1) the complete scene view (the one selected as front view), (2) individual object views showing each part’s location in the scene (ind_x.png), (3) red highlighted masks labeling each part (mask_x.png), and (4) the bounding box visualization. Additionally, pre-generated captions and bounding box data for each part are provided as textual input. The complete prompt is shown in Figure S9. 15 Figure S5 Bounding box visualization for spatial relationship analysis. The top-down view shows the X-Z plane projection with all objects represented by their bounding box footprints. The legend is labeled with short captions.  

> B.4.1 Example Generated Assembly Plan

Figure S10 shows a complete example of the assembly plan generated for the nightstand scene shown in previous figures. The output demonstrates both the spatial relationship analysis (in the parts section) and the sequential assembly instructions (in the assembly_plan section), following the format specified in the prompt. 

## C Implementation Details 

C.1 Model Architecture 

Following Deng et al. (2025), our model employs a Mixture of Transformers (MoT) architecture with two specialized transformer backbones: one dedicated to scene understanding and another to scene generation. Each transformer backbone is configured with a hidden size of 3584 and consists of 28 layers. The attention mechanism employs Grouped-Query Attention (GQA) (Ainslie et al., 2023) with 28 query heads and 4 key-value heads. Each transformer contains 7 billion active parameters, yielding a total of 14 billion parameters across both transformers. The understanding transformer processes text instructions and 3D VAE latents. An extra linear layer is applied after the patchification of 3D VAE latents before sending to the transformer. The generation transformer only works on denoising the VAE latents. Another two linear layers are applied to map 3D VAE latents to the same size as the transformer’s hidden size and map back. For positional embedding for 3D understanding and generation, we also follow Deng et al. (2025) and extend it to 3D: instead of applying sinusoidal positional encoding to 2D spatial coordinates, we partition the embedding vector into three segments to encode the X, Y, and Z dimensions independently. 

C.2 3D-ARD+ Training Details 

During training, we set the maximum sequence length to 20480 tokens. We use greedy algorithm to select sequences to form a long sequence until reach the maximum sequence length. The clean ground truth VAE latents are used as inputs for the 3D understanding block, while noised ground truth VAE latents are used for the generation block. To handle sequences that may exceed the maximum sequence length, we apply selective dropout strategies. For generation blocks, we randomly retain only 1 to 3 generation blocks. For refinement, we select at most 7 objects to have their refinement steps in one sequence. Additionally, we apply dropout with probability 0.1 to both 3D understanding blocks and text blocks for CFG’s use. 16 (a) Part 0 (b) Part 1 (c) Part 2 (d) Part 3         

> (e) Part 0 (mask) (f) Part 1 (mask) (g) Part 2 (mask) (h) Part 3 (mask)
> Figure S6 Input visualization for assembly plan generation. Top row: Individual parts in its original location. Bottom row: masks highlighting each part in red for precise object identification. These visualizations, combined with bounding box data (Figure S5), enable the model to reason about spatial relationships and generate physically grounded assembly instructions.

C.3 Inference Details 

During autoregressive generation, we maintain a key-value cache for already-generated tokens to avoid redundant computation. The KV cache is updated incrementally as new tokens are generated. To obtain the final 3D model with appearance, we first use TRELLIS’s 3D VAE decoder (Xiang et al., 2025) to recover sparse structured latents from our generated tokens. We then apply TRELLIS’s second-stage diffusion model, conditioned on the same text prompts of this step, to generate higher-resolution 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) representations with detailed appearance and texture information. After generating fine-grained 3D assets in object space using 3D-ARD+, we merge them back into the scene space. We calculate the bounding box of the coarse-grained object in scene space, then force it to be a cube by fixing the center then extending its dimensions to match the longest edge. The fine-grained object-space 3D assets are then inserted into the corresponding region of the scene-space representation according to the former bounding box. 

## D Training Data Details 

Our training data consists of three complementary datasets, totaling approximately 1.23 million samples, which provide comprehensive coverage of single objects, furniture items, and complete indoor scenes.  

> Single Object Dataset (1M).

We curate a single-object dataset of around 1M assets. Half consists of everyday objects across various categories including small objects, cartoon animals, characters and buildings. Another half consists of single object indoor furniture items, including detailed furniture pieces such as chairs, tables or decorative objects. All objects are accompanied by descriptive captions labeled by a VLM that emphasize properties including geometry, appearance, materials, structural components, support surfaces, and functional features.  

> Internal Scene Dataset (230K).

Our scene dataset comprises 230K indoor scenes, representing various room types including bedrooms, living rooms, dining rooms, home offices, and kitchens. Each scene contains multiple 17 Object Captioning Prompt 

System Instruction: You are an indoor scene analyzer specializing in furniture and object analysis with focus on assembly planning. You will receive two types of images for each part: 1. Entire scene view with all objects together (showing the complete furniture group/scene) 2. Normalized/magnified views of each part (zoomed-in view focusing on the specific part) Your goal is to generate a concise descriptive caption for each part, considering its role in the assembly process. 

IMPORTANT: If multiple parts are the same asset but in different location/rotation, please use exactly the same description. 

IMPORTANT: Consider assembly steps when captioning. If a piece of furniture is supporting other objects, describe those supporting structures and capabilities. 

For each part, describe: 

• Object type/component (e.g., chair, table leg, drawer, door, etc.) 

• Material, color, and key visual features 

• Shape and style characteristics 

• Supporting structures and surfaces (if the object supports other items) 

Assembly-focused caption guidelines: 

• For tables, desks, shelves: Describe the surface area, load-bearing capacity indicators 

• For chairs, stools: Describe seating surface, backrest, armrests 

• For storage furniture: Describe compartments, doors, drawers, and internal organization 

• For supporting structures: Describe legs, frames, bases, and their stability characteristics 

• There should be another short_caption , which is a condensed version of the caption in approximately 5 words, capturing the essential object type and key feature (e.g., ‘wooden dining chair’, ‘round glass table’, ‘metal desk lamp’) 

Format your response as a JSON object: 

{"captions": [{"part_idx": 0, "caption": "concise assembly-aware description", "short_caption": "5-word summary"}, {"part_idx": 1, "caption": "...", "short_caption": "..."}, ...}] 

CRITICAL REQUIREMENTS for captions: 

• Each item must have exactly three keys: ‘part_idx’, ‘caption’, ‘short_caption’ 

• Each part_idx from 0 to N-1 (where N is total parts) must appear exactly once 

• The part_idx=x description must correspond STRICTLY to the x-th normalized image shown in the input sequence Keep captions concise but descriptive. Focus on visual appearance, object identification, and assembly functionality. 

Here is an example of the expected format: 

1 {

2 " c a p t i o n s " : [

3 {

4 " part_idx " : 0 , 

5 " c a p t i o n " : "A round side t a b l e with a dark wood top and a black metal splayed l e g frame , serving as the base for the scene ." , 

6 " s h o r t _ c a p t i o n " : "round side t a b l e " 

7 } , 

8 {

9 " part_idx " : 1 , 

10 " c a p t i o n " : "A decorative group consisting of two abstract human- l i k e figurines , one black and one white , seated next to a black lantern with a white candle ." , 

11 " s h o r t _ c a p t i o n " : "decorative figurine group" 

12 } , 

13 {

14 " part_idx " : 2 , 

15 " c a p t i o n " : "A black t a b l e lamp featuring a pleated shade and an angular , faceted base , providing illumination ." , 

16 " s h o r t _ c a p t i o n " : "black t a b l e lamp" 

17 }

18 ]

19 }

User Prompt: Generate captions for each part and provide the response in JSON format. Images: [all_together.png], [norm_part_0.png], [norm_part_1.png], ... 

Figure S7 Object captioning prompt used to generate multi-granularity textual descriptions for each object in the scene. 

objects (2-15) arranged in realistic spatial configurations, along with assembly plans generated through our automated data curation pipeline. When using single-object data for training, we also incorporate refinement steps to enable the model to learn fine-grained geometry generation. To create training diversity, we randomize the location and scale of the coarse generation step, ensuring the model learns to refine objects at various positions and sizes. 

## E Limitations and Future Work 

While our proposed method demonstrates promising results in language-conditioned 3D scene generation, we acknowledge two main limitations that present opportunities for future research. 

• Despite our explicit spatial condition, the generated layouts are not always perfect. Specifically, overlapping or gaps between two adjacent objects are not always resolved correctly. While our assembly plan provides sequential placement instructions and relative spatial relationships, the spatial condition representation (VAE tokens) may lack sufficient granularity to precisely encode fine-grained spatial positioning. Instead of relying solely on VAE tokens, we can explore more fine-grained encoding by focusing only on surface area in a higher resolution, or use other native 3D encoders (Wu et al., 2025b) that show better spatial understanding accuracy. 

• The size of the first placed object (especially when it is a foundational element like a sofa and table) might be too large relative to the intended scene bounds, leaving insufficient space to accommodate 18 1 {

2 " c a p t i o n s " : [

3 {

4 " part_idx " : 0 , 

5 " c a p t i o n " : "A decorative potted plant featuring a dense arrangement of l i g h t blue hydrangea flowers and green leaves in a smooth , round white vase , designed to be placed on a f l a t surface ." , 

6 " s h o r t _ c a p t i o n " : "Blue hydrangea potted plant" 

7 } , 

8 {

9 " part_idx " : 1 , 

10 " c a p t i o n " : "A rectangular picture frame with an elegant , molded l i g h t beige f i n i s h and a white image , featuring a kickstand for freestanding tabletop display ." , 

11 " s h o r t _ c a p t i o n " : "Rectangular decorative picture frame" 

12 } , 

13 {

14 " part_idx " : 2 , 

15 " c a p t i o n " : "A modern t a b l e lamp featuring a tapered round l i g h t - colored fabric shade with dark trim , mounted on a sturdy , angular dark brown or black square base , providing illumination ." , 

16 " s h o r t _ c a p t i o n " : "Modern round t a b l e lamp" 

17 } , 

18 {

19 " part_idx " : 3 , 

20 " c a p t i o n " : "A sleek , grey nightstand or cabinet featuring a f l a t top surface for display , two drawers with a gold - toned rectangular p u l l handle , and supported by a s t r i k i n g gold - colored metal base , providing s t a b i l i t y and storage ." , 

21 " s h o r t _ c a p t i o n " : "grey nightstand gold base" 

22 }

23 ]

24 }

Figure S8 Example object captions generated for a nightstand scene with decorative items. 

subsequent objects according to the assembly plan. This can lead to spatial constraint violations. To alleviate this, we can design an adaptive scene generation framework where the available spatial bounds adjust dynamically based on the scale of all objects generated up to now. This would inform the model to allocate appropriate space before placing the next object. 

• Since our current method is based on a relatively large base model for its text understanding capacity, the generation time of a complex scene usually takes 5 − 10 × longer than existing 3D generators, like TRELLIS. Due to the pure transformer architecture, inference efficiency could be further improved using modern transformer serving platforms and infrastructure. 19 Assembly Plan Generation Prompt 

System Instruction: You are an indoor scene analyzer specializing in furniture assembly and spatial relationships. You will receive: 1. Entire scene view with all objects together 2. Individual views of each part in the world coordinate system 3. Pre-generated captions for each part 4. 3D bounding box data (dimensions, center positions, volume) 5. Top-down bounding box visualization (X-Z plane projection) 

Coordinate System: +Z is forward, +X is right. Use Y differences for up/down positioning (higher Y = upper), Z differences for front/back positioning (higher Z = farther from camera). 

Your goals are to: 

1. Determine the spatial relationship of each part relative to the overall group/scene 2. Generate a construction/assembly plan for the entire scene that describes how to build it step by step 3. Focus on relative locations and positioning of parts 4. Use the 3D bounding box data to understand precise spatial relationships and object sizes 

IMPORTANT: If multiple assets are similar, be careful to distinguish them clearly by their specific spatial locations and contextual details. 

IMPORTANT: Carefully identify whether objects have adjacent relationships (next to each other) vs support relationships (one object supporting/holding another). This distinction is crucial for understanding the scene structure and construction order. 

For each part, analyze: 

• Position relative to other parts (e.g., left, right, upper, lower, front, back, center) 

• Spatial relationships with other components 

• Functional role in the overall furniture/scene assembly 

• Support relationships (what supports this part, what this part supports) 

• Physical dimensions and size relationships between objects 

For the assembly plan: 

• Start with foundational/base objects (e.g., tables, floors, large furniture) 

• Progress from large to small objects 

• Describe the placement order that respects gravity (supporting objects before supported objects) 

• Include precise spatial relationships and dependencies between parts 

• Each step should describe the positioning and relative location 

• Consider object dimensions when describing placement and clearances 

Format your response as a JSON object: 

{"parts": [{"part_idx": 0, "caption": "use provided caption", "spatial_relation": "position relative to whole"}, ...], "assembly_plan": [{"instructions": "step 1 describing positioning", "part_idx": 2, "assembly_idx": 0}, ...}] 

CRITICAL REQUIREMENTS for parts: 

• Each item must have exactly three keys: ‘part_idx’, ‘caption’, ‘spatial_relation’ 

• Use the provided captions as base, but supplement them if they lack support structures mentioned in assembly plan 

• spatial_relation should describe the part’s position relative to the whole scene and other parts 

CRITICAL REQUIREMENTS for assembly_plan: 

• Each item must have exactly three keys: ‘instructions’, ‘part_idx’, ‘assembly_idx’ 

• part_idx follows the idx of objects from the ‘parts’, and each part_idx from 0 to N-1 (where N is total parts) must appear exactly once 

• No part_idx should be repeated or omitted 

• ‘assembly_idx’ goes from 0 to N-1 

• Instructions should describe the placement/positioning of that specific part 

• You can use ‘assembly object x’ to refer to the part with assembly_idx=x, but never use ‘part x’ to refer objects in the assembly instructions 

• Order the assembly steps logically (foundation first, then objects placed on them) Keep spatial descriptions precise and actionable for assembly purposes. 

Here is an example of the expected format: User Prompt: Generate spatial relationships and assembly plan using the provided captions. Provide the JSON response as specified. 

Figure S9 Assembly plan generation prompt used to produce both spatial relationship analysis and sequential assembly instructions. 

20 1 {

2 " p a r t s " : [

3 {

4 " part_idx " : 0 , 

5 " c a p t i o n " : "A decorative potted plant featuring a dense arrangement of l i g h t blue hydrangea flowers and green leaves in a smooth , round white vase , designed to be placed on a f l a t surface ." , 

6 " s p a t i a l _ r e l a t i o n " : "Positioned on the upper - l e f t surface of the nightstand (Part 3) , to the l e f t of the t a b l e lamp (Part 2) , serving as adecorative accent ." 

7 } , 

8 {

9 " part_idx " : 1 , 

10 " c a p t i o n " : "A rectangular picture frame with an elegant , molded l i g h t beige f i n i s h and a white image , featuring a kickstand for freestanding tabletop display ." , 

11 " s p a t i a l _ r e l a t i o n " : "Positioned on the upper - r ig ht surface of the nightstand (Part 3) , to the ri gh t of the t a b l e lamp (Part 2) , providing apersonal decorative touch ." 

12 } , 

13 {

14 " part_idx " : 2 , 

15 " c a p t i o n " : "A modern t a b l e lamp featuring a tapered round l i g h t - colored fabric shade with dark trim , mounted on a sturdy , angular dark brown or black square base , providing illumination ." , 

16 " s p a t i a l _ r e l a t i o n " : "Positioned centrally on the top surface of the nightstand (Part 3) , behind and between the potted plant (Part 0) and the picture frame (Part 1) , serving as the primary source of illumination ." 

17 } , 

18 {

19 " part_idx " : 3 , 

20 " c a p t i o n " : "A sleek , grey nightstand or cabinet featuring a f l a t top surface for display , two drawers with a gold - toned rectangular p u l l handle , and supported by a s t r i k i n g gold - colored metal base , providing s t a b i l i t y and storage ." , 

21 " s p a t i a l _ r e l a t i o n " : "The primary and foundational furniture piece , located at the base of the scene , supporting a l l other decorative and functional items (Part 0 , Part 1 , Part 2) on i t s top surface ." 

22 }

23 ] , 

24 " assembly_plan " : [

25 {

26 " i n s t r u c t i o n s " : "Place the sleek , grey nightstand or cabinet (assembly object 0) as the foundational element , providing the main surface and structure for the entire scene ." , 

27 " part_idx " : 3 , 

28 " assembly_idx " : 0

29 } , 

30 {

31 " i n s t r u c t i o n s " : "Position the modern t a b l e lamp (assembly object 1) with tapered round shade centrally on the top surface of the nightstand (assembly object 0) , ensuring i t i s s t a b l e and serves as a backdrop for smaller items ." , 

32 " part_idx " : 2 , 

33 " assembly_idx " : 1

34 } , 

35 {

36 " i n s t r u c t i o n s " : "Place the decorative potted plant with blue hydrangea flowers (assembly object 2) on the top surface of the nightstand (assembly object 0) , to the l e f t of the t a b l e lamp (assembly object 1) , enhancing the decor ." , 

37 " part_idx " : 0 , 

38 " assembly_idx " : 2

39 } , 

40 {

41 " i n s t r u c t i o n s " : "Arrange the rectangular picture frame with l i g h t beige f i n i s h (assembly object 3) on the top surface of the nightstand (assembly object 0) , to the r ig ht of the t a b l e lamp (assembly object 1) , completing the decorative arrangement ." , 

42 " part_idx " : 1 , 

43 " assembly_idx " : 3

44 }

45 ]

46 }

Figure S10 Example assembly plan generated for a nightstand scene with decorative items. 

21 MIDI  BB. + TRELLIS  LLM Layout 

+ TRELLIS 

TRELLIS -text 

XL 

Ours 

1) Place the rectangular console table as the 

central and foundational element of the 

scene... 2) Position the upright, spiky green 

plant in … pot on the far left side... 3) Place 

the lush green leafy plant in ... pot on the top 

surface... to the right of the spiky green plant. 

4) Place ...brown, bare tree branches in its 

light grey vase on the top surface... 5) Position 

the modern table lamp... 6) Place the tall, 

rectangular mirror on the top surface ... 

1) Place the classic white bathroom vanity 

unit... This unit provides the integrated sink 

and faucet... 2) Mount the rectangular 

bathroom mirror with a thick, classic white 

frame centrally on the wall, directly above the 

vanity unit... 3) Place the potted plant on the 

left side of the vanity unit... 4) Position the 

tall, cylindrical two -toned bottle or jar on the 

right side of … the vanity unit... 5) Place the 

small … container on the right side… 

1) Place the L -shaped modular sectional sofa 

as … seating element... 2) Position the 

rectangular coffee table centrally in front of 

the main seating section of the L -shaped 

modular sectional sofa... 3) Place the modern 

upholstered armchair to the left of the 

rectangular coffee table and diagonally to the 

front -left of the L -shaped modular sectional 

sofa... 4) Arrange the collection of assorted 

square throw pillows on the seat… 

1) Place the dark brown wooden vanity desk 

as the central and foundational element of the 

scene... 2) Mount the round wall mirror 

centrally on the wall above the vanity desk... 

3) Position the classic dark wood chair 

directly in front of the central opening of the 

vanity desk... 4) Place the table lamp with a 

rectangular white shade on the top surface... 

5) Arrange the set of two overlapping photo 

frames on the top surface ... 

Text Instructions 

1) Place the white bedside nightstand as the 

central and foundational element of the scene... 

2) Position the decorative table lamp centrally 

on the top surface of the nightstand... 3) Place 

the open book on the top surface of the 

nightstand, positioned towards the front -left 

from the viewer's perspective, to complement 

the scene as a decorative element. 

1) Place the sturdy square side table made of 

dark wood as the central and foundational 

element of the scene, providing a stable 

surface that will support other objects. 2) 

Position the small green plant in a textured, 

light grey, organic -shaped pot on the top 

surface of the square side table... 3) Place the 

stack of decorative books on the top surface of 

the square side table... 

1) Place the light -toned rectangular coffee table 

…, providing both a top display surface and a 

lower storage shelf ... 2) Position the stack ... 

books... 3) Place the stack of five light -colored 

books with the top book… 4) Arrange the stack 

of dark -covered books... on the lower shelf of 

the coffee table... 5) ... 6) Position the 

decorative floral arrangement ... on the top 

surface of the coffee table... 7) Arrange the 

collection of decorative tabletop items... 

Reference Image 

(by a Public VLM) 

FAILED 

FAILED 

FAILED  FAILED Figure S11 More qualitative comparison results. We present additional visual results comparing our method with baseline approaches. Grey boxes labeled "FAILED" indicate that the corresponding baseline methods are unable to produce any output. 

22 References 

Joshua Ainslie, James Lee-Thorp, Michiel De Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Federico Lebrón, and Sumit Sanghai. Gqa: Training generalized multi-query transformer models from multi-head checkpoints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13245 ,2023. B Amirkhanov, T Nurgazy, G Amirkhanova, M Kunelbayev, and G Tyulepberdinova. Creating 3d models of production equipment and infrastructure using blender. Int. J. Innovative Res. Sci. Stud. , 8(1):1572–1588, 2025. Kiran Bhat, Nishchaie Khanna, Karun Channa, Tinghui Zhou, Yiheng Zhu, Xiaoxia Sun, Charles Shang, Anirudh Sudarshan, Maurice Chu, Daiqing Li, et al. Cube: A roblox view of 3d intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15475 ,2025. Mikołaj Bińkowski, Danica J. Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying mmd gans. In ICLR ,2018. Aleksey Bokhovkin, Quan Meng, Shubham Tulsiani, and Angela Dai. Scenefactor: Factored latent 3d diffusion for controllable 3d scene generation. In CVPR , pages 628–639, 2025. Ata Çelen, Guo Han, Konrad Schindler, Luc Van Gool, Iro Armeni, Anton Obukhov, and Xi Wang. I-design: Personalized llm interior designer. In ECCV , pages 217–234, 2024. Xiaokang Chen, Zhiyu Wu, Xingchao Liu, Zizheng Pan, Wen Liu, Zhenda Xie, Xingkai Yu, and Chong Ruan. Janus-pro: Unified multimodal understanding and generation with data and model scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17811 ,2025. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. Xiaoliang Dai, Ji Hou, Chih-Yao Ma, Sam Tsai, Jialiang Wang, Rui Wang, Peizhao Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Xiaofang Wang, Abhimanyu Dubey, et al. Emu: Enhancing image generation models using photogenic needles in a haystack. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15807 , 2023. Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han, Eric Kolve, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai using procedural generation. In 

NeurIPS , pages 5982–5994, 2022. Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al. Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects. In NeurIPS ,pages 35799–35813, 2023a. Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In CVPR , pages 13142–13153, 2023b. Chaorui Deng, Deyao Zhu, Kunchang Li, Chenhui Gou, Feng Li, Zeyu Wang, Shu Zhong, Weihao Yu, Xiaonan Nie, Ziang Song, et al. Emerging properties in unified multimodal pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14683 , 2025. Chuan Fang, Yuan Dong, Kunming Luo, Xiaotao Hu, Rakesh Shrestha, and Ping Tan. Ctrl-room: Controllable text-to-3d room meshes generation with layout constraints. In 3DV , pages 692–701, 2025. Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Reddy Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional visual planning and generation with large language models. In 

NeurIPS , pages 18225–18250, 2023. Rao Fu, Zehao Wen, Zichen Liu, and Srinath Sridhar. Anyhome: Open-vocabulary generation of structured and textured 3d homes. In ECCV , pages 52–70, 2024. Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual inversion. In ICLR , 2023. Zeqi Gu, Yin Cui, Zhaoshuo Li, Fangyin Wei, Yunhao Ge, Jinwei Gu, Ming-Yu Liu, Abe Davis, and Yifan Ding. Artiscene: Language-driven artistic 3d scene generation through image intermediary. CVPR , pages 2891–2901, 2025. Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 , 2022. 

23 Jiacheng Hong, Kunzhen Wu, Mingrui Yu, Yichao Gu, Shengze Xue, Shuangjiu Xiao, and Deli Dong. Higs: Hierarchical generative scene framework for multi-step associative semantic spatial composition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.27148 ,2025. Ziniu Hu, Ahmet Iscen, Aashi Jain, Thomas Kipf, Yisong Yue, David A Ross, Cordelia Schmid, and Alireza Fathi. Scenecraft: An llm agent for synthesizing 3d scenes as blender code. In ICML , 2024. Tianyu Huang, Wangguandong Zheng, Tengfei Wang, Yuhao Liu, Zhenwei Wang, Junta Wu, Jie Jiang, Hui Li, Rynson WH Lau, Wangmeng Zuo, and Chunchao Guo. Voyager: Long-range and world-consistent video diffusion for explorable 3d scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.04225 , 2025a. Zehuan Huang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Xingqiao An, Yunhan Yang, Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Ding Liang, Xihui Liu, Yan-Pei Cao, and Lu Sheng. Midi: Multi-instance diffusion for single image to 3d scene generation. In CVPR , pages 23646–23657, 2025b. Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. Heewoo Jun and Alex Nichol. Shap-e: Generating conditional 3d implicit functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02463 ,2023. Haoran Li, Haolin Shi, Wenli Zhang, Wenjun Wu, Yong Liao, Lin Wang, Lik-Hang Lee, and Pengyuan Zhou. Dreamscene: 3d gaussian-based text-to-3d scene generation via formation pattern sampling. In ECCV , pages 214–230, 2024. Sikuang Li, Chen Yang, Jiemin Fang, Taoran Yi, Jia Lu, Jiazhong Cen, Lingxi Xie, Wei Shen, and Qi Tian. Worldgrow: Generating infinite 3d world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.21682 , 2025. Yixun Liang, Xin Yang, Jiantao Lin, Haodong Li, Xiaogang Xu, and Yingcong Chen. Luciddreamer: Towards high-fidelity text-to-3d generation via interval score matching. In CVPR , pages 6517–6526, 2024. Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content creation. In CVPR , pages 300–309, 2023. Lu Ling, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yifan Ding, Yu Zeng, Yichen Sheng, Yunhao Ge, Ming-Yu Liu, Aniket Bera, and Zhaoshuo Li. Scenethesis: A language and vision agentic framework for 3d scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02836 , 2025. Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, et al. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. In ICLR , 2023. Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Syncdreamer: Generating multiview-consistent images from a single-view image. In ICLR , 2024. Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma, Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, et al. Wonder3d: Single image to 3d using cross-domain diffusion. In CVPR , pages 9970–9980, 2024. Soroush Nasiriany, Abhiram Maddukuri, Lance Zhang, Adeet Parikh, Aaron Lo, Abhishek Joshi, Ajay Mandlekar, and Yuke Zhu. Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for generalist robots. In RSS Workshop DGR , 2024. Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela Mishkin, and Mark Chen. Point-e: A system for generating 3d point clouds from complex prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08751 , 2022. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In 

NeurIPS , pages 27730–27744, 2022. Xichen Pan, Satya Narayan Shukla, Aashu Singh, Zhuokai Zhao, Shlok Kumar Mishra, Jialiang Wang, Zhiyang Xu, Jiuhai Chen, Kunpeng Li, Felix Juefei-Xu, et al. Transfer between modalities with metaqueries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06256 , 2025. Despoina Paschalidou, Amlan Kar, Maria Shugrina, Karsten Kreis, Andreas Geiger, and Sanja Fidler. Atiss: Autoregressive transformers for indoor scene synthesis. In NeurIPS , pages 12013–12026, 2021. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In NeurIPS , pages 8026–8037, 2019. 

24 William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In ICCV , pages 4195–4205, 2023. Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, A. Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Muller, Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. ArXiv , abs/2307.01952, 2023. Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. In ICLR ,2023. Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin, James Bradbury, Anselm Levskaya, Jonathan Heek, Kefan Xiao, Shivani Agrawal, and Jeff Dean. Efficiently scaling transformer inference. In MLSys , pages 606–624, 2022. Hou In Derek Pun, Hou In Ivan Tam, Austin T Wang, Xiaoliang Huo, Angel X Chang, and Manolis Savva. Hsm: Hierarchical scene motifs for multi-scale indoor scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16848 , 2025. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML , pages 8748–8763, 2021. Alexander Raistrick, Lingjie Mei, Karhan Kayan, David Yan, Yiming Zuo, Beining Han, Hongyu Wen, Meenal Parakh, Stamatis Alexandropoulos, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, and Jia Deng. Infinigen indoors: Photorealistic indoor scenes using procedural generation. In CVPR , pages 21783–21794, 2024. Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML , pages 8821–8831, 2021. Xingjian Ran, Yixuan Li, Linning Xu, Mulin Yu, and Bo Dai. Direct numerical layout generation for 3d indoor scene synthesis via spatial reasoning. ArXiv , abs/2506.05341, 2025. Tianhe Ren and et al. Grounded SAM: Assembling Open-World Models for Diverse Visual Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159 , 2024. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR , pages 10684–10695, 2022. Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR , pages 22500–22510, 2023. Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In NeurIPS , pages 36479–36494, 2022. Johannes L Schönberger, Enliang Zheng, Jan-Michael Frahm, and Marc Pollefeys. Pixelwise view selection for unstructured multi-view stereo. In ECCV , pages 501–518, 2016. Weijia Shi, Xiaochuang Han, Chunting Zhou, Weixin Liang, Xi Victoria Lin, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Lili Yu. Lmfusion: Adapting pretrained language models for multimodal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15188 , 2024a. Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Mai Long, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. Mvdream: Multi-view diffusion for 3d generation. In ICLR , 2024b. Yawar Siddiqui, Tom Monnier, Filippos Kokkinos, Mahendra Kariya, Yanir Kleiman, Emilien Garreau, Oran Gafni, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, Roman Shapovalov, et al. Meta 3d assetgen: Text-to-mesh generation with high-quality geometry, texture, and pbr materials. In NeurIPS , pages 9532–9564, 2024. Andrew Szot, Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre, Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, et al. Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to rearrange their habitat. In NeurIPS , pages 251–266, 2021. Jiapeng Tang, Yinyu Nie, Lev Markhasin, Angela Dai, Justus Thies, and Matthias Nießner. Diffuscene: Denoising diffusion models for generative indoor scene synthesis. In CVPR , pages 20507–20518, 2024. Chameleon Team. Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09818 , 2024. UKCMA. Anticipated acquisition by microsoft of activision blizzard, inc. https://www.gov.uk/cmacases/ microsoft-slash-activision-blizzard-merger-inquiry. 2022. Alexander Vilesov, Pradyumna Chari, and Achuta Kadambi. Cg3d: Compositional generation for text-to-3d via gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17907 , 2023. 

25 Chunwei Wang, Guansong Lu, Junwei Yang, Runhui Huang, Jianhua Han, Lu Hou, Wei Zhang, and Hang Xu. Illume: Illuminating your llms to see, draw, and self-enhance. In ICCV , pages 21612–21622, 2025a. Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In CVPR , pages 12619–12629, 2023a. Xiping Wang, Yuxi Wang, Mengqi Zhou, Junsong Fan, and Zhaoxiang Zhang. Hlg: Comprehensive 3d room construction via hierarchical layout generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.17832 , 2025b. Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolificdreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. In NeurIPS , pages 8406–8441, 2023b. Chengyue Wu, Xiaokang Chen, Zhiyu Wu, Yiyang Ma, Xingchao Liu, Zizheng Pan, Wen Liu, Zhenda Xie, Xingkai Yu, Chong Ruan, et al. Janus: Decoupling visual encoding for unified multimodal understanding and generation. In 

CVPR , pages 12966–12977, 2025a. Xiaoyang Wu, Daniel DeTone, Duncan Frost, Tianwei Shen, Chris Xie, Nan Yang, Jakob Engel, Richard Newcombe, Hengshuang Zhao, and Julian Straub. Sonata: Self-supervised learning of reliable point representations. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 22193–22204, 2025b. Zhennan Wu, Yang Li, Han Yan, Taizhang Shang, Weixuan Sun, Senbo Wang, Ruikai Cui, Weizhe Liu, Hiroyuki Sato, Hongdong Li, et al. Blockfusion: Expandable 3d scene generation using latent tri-plane extrapolation. ACM TOG ,43(4):1–17, 2024. Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In CVPR , pages 21469–21480, 2025. Rongchang Xie, Chen Du, Ping Song, and Chang Liu. Muse-vl: Modeling unified vlm through semantic discrete encoding. In ICCV , pages 24135–24146, 2025. Han Yan, Yang Li, Zhennan Wu, Shenzhou Chen, Weixuan Sun, Taizhang Shang, Weizhe Liu, Tian Chen, Xiaqiang Dai, Chao Ma, et al. Frankenstein: Generating semantic-compositional 3d scenes in one tri-plane. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , 2024. Xiuyu Yang, Yunze Man, Jun-Kun Chen, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Scenecraft: Layout-guided 3d scene generation. In 

NeurIPS , pages 82060–82084, 2024a. Yandan Yang, Baoxiong Jia, Peiyuan Zhi, and Siyuan Huang. Physcene: Physically interactable 3d scene synthesis for embodied ai. In CVPR , pages 16262–16272, 2024b. Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, et al. Holodeck: Language guided generation of 3d embodied ai environments. In CVPR , pages 16227–16237, 2024c. Yandan Yang, Baoxiong Jia, Shujie Zhang, and Siyuan Huang. Sceneweaver: All-in-one 3d scene synthesis with an extensible and self-reflective agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20414 , 2025. Shangjin Zhai, Zhichao Ye, Jialin Liu, Weijian Xie, Jiaqi Hu, Zhen Peng, Hua Xue, Danpeng Chen, Xiaomeng Wang, Lei Yang, Nan Wang, Haomin Liu, and Guofeng Zhang. Stargen: A spatiotemporal autoregression framework with video diffusion model for scalable and controllable scene generation. In CVPR , pages 26822–26833, 2025. Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu, Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for creating high-quality 3d assets. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 43(4):1–20, 2024a. Qihang Zhang, Chaoyang Wang, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Peiye Zhuang, Yinghao Xu, Ceyuan Yang, Dahua Lin, Bolei Zhou, Sergey Tulyakov, and Hsin-Ying Lee. Towards text-guided 3d scene composition. In CVPR , pages 6829–6838, 2024b. Chunting Zhou, Lili Yu, Arun Babu, Kushal Tirumala, Michihiro Yasunaga, Leonid Shamis, Jacob Kahn, Xuezhe Ma, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. Transfusion: Predict the next token and diffuse images with one multi-modal model. In ICLR , 2025a. Mengqi Zhou, Xipeng Wang, Yuxi Wang, and Zhaoxiang Zhang. Roomcraft: Controllable and complete 3d indoor scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22291 , 2025b. 

26 Shijie Zhou, Zhiwen Fan, Dejia Xu, Haoran Chang, Pradyumna Chari, Tejas Bharadwaj, Suya You, Zhangyang Wang, and Achuta Kadambi. Dreamscene360: Unconstrained text-to-3d scene generation with panoramic gaussian splatting. In ECCV , pages 324–342, 2024a. Wenxu Zhou, Kaixuan Nie, Hang Du, Dong Yin, Wei Huang, Siqiang Guo, Xiaobo Zhang, and Pengbo Hu. Il3d: A large-scale indoor layout dataset for llm-driven 3d scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12095 , 2025c. Xiaoyu Zhou, Xingjian Ran, Yajiao Xiong, Jinlin He, Zhiwei Lin, Yongtao Wang, Deqing Sun, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Gala3d: towards text-to-3d complex scene generation via layout-guided generative gaussian splatting. In ICML ,2024b. Junzhe Zhu, Peiye Zhuang, and Sanmi Koyejo. Hifa: High-fidelity text-to-3d generation with advanced diffusion guidance. In ICLR , 2024. Xiaoming Zhu, Xu Huang, Qinghongbing Xie, Zhi Deng, Junsheng Yu, Yirui Guan, Zhongyuan Liu, Lin Zhu, Qijun Zhao, Ligang Liu, et al. Imaginarium: Vision-guided high-quality 3d scene layout generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15564 , 2025. 

27