Title: Why we should condition denoising diffusion generative models on windows of past observations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.10924v1

Published Time: Fri, 11 Sep 2026 00:22:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Why we should condition denoising diffusion generative models on windows of past observations 

Matthias Morzfeld 1, Daniel Hodyss 21 Cecil H. and Ida M. Green Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, CA  

> 2

Remote Sensing Division, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington DC 

Abstract 

Data assimilation (DA) is, traditionally, a cycling process that relies on time-dependent priors to propagate information from past observations to future cycles. Using denoising diffusion gener-ative modeling for DA is challenging because standard approaches use a fixed training data set, which in turn leads to a static prior that ignores information from past observations. Because past observations are ignored, DA systems with static priors lead to larger posterior errors than cycling DA systems. Incorporating time-dependent priors into generative models, however, requires expensive and frequent retraining. Motivated by linear systems theory – where the dependence of a prediction of a Kalman filter on past observations decays exponentially – we condition diffusion models on short windows of past observations. Specifically, we describe training procedures for two frameworks: a diffusion DA system predicting the current state given a set of past observations, and a diffusion “direct observation prediction” (DOP) system, predicting future observations given a set of past observations. Using a canonical linear system, we show that both systems can achieve the minimal posterior error characteristic of a fully-cycled DA/DOP system, without re-training, provided the time windows are long enough. The linear setup ensures analytical tractability, avoids confounding neural network training errors, and confirms that conditioning on windows of past observations is required for efficient and accurate diffusion-based DA or DOP. 

# 1 Introduction 

Numerical weather prediction (NWP) traditionally relies on a cycling data assimilation (DA) pro-cess over time windows: New observations, collected during the current time window, are used to update a forecast to an analysis, so that a new forecast can be generated for the next time window. The forecasts are generated by a “physics-based” model that approximates the time evolution of Earth’s atmosphere, given a set of initial and boundary conditions. The cycling process in DA ensures that information from past observations propagates, via the forecast model, to current and future analyses. Mathematically, cycling DA requires time-dependent priors. In particular, these posterior distributions from the last cycle turn into prior distributions for the next cycle (see, e.g., Morzfeld and Hodyss, 2019). Moreover, the time-dependent priors are informed by all past observations (due to cycling), which means that the priors have minimal variance. By keeping deviations from the prior state minimal, traditional cycling DA systems can successfully apply linear tangent and adjoint models (in variational schemes) or linear update equations (ensemble Kalman filtering) to highly non-linear atmospheric dynamics. Indeed, the various linear and Gaussian assumptions required by current ensemble DA (variational, ensemble or hybrid) may be one of the main reasons for frequent cycling in conventional DA systems. Recent advances in machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) challenge traditional DA in various ways, in particular because Ml/AI techniques are capable of fully nonlinear analyses that 1arXiv:2609.10924v1 [math-ph] 10 Sep 2026 may not require nearly linear dynamics or nearly Gaussian priors. First, one may consider AI-tools (data-driven models) to replace the physics-based model to emulate and speed up the forecast model. Three recent Google models, GraphCast (Lam et al., 2023), neural-GCM (Kochkov et al., 2024) and GenCast (Price et al., 2025) are examples of AI forecasting tools that have reached or exceeded the skill of traditional systems, usually bench-marked by the forecast skill of the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF). By now, AI forecasting tools are integrated into ECMWF’s AI-FS (Lang et al., 2024) and are used operationally. We note that this integration happened at a rapid speed and in just a few years. One may also consider replacing the entire DA system by an AI-tool. Such DA systems are some-times called “end-to-end” systems and the goal is to use an AI model that maps observations directly to future observations or to future atmospheric states. At the time of writing, end-to-end systems are not as wide spread and not as well understood as the AI forecasting tools described above, but progress is rapid (Pinnington et al., 2026). One candidate class of AI tools for “pure” AI-driven DA are denoising diffusion generative models. Broadly, a diffusion model can learn an empirical distribution from training data and, once trained, produces new samples from that empirical distribution (see Section 2.3 or, e.g., Karras et al. (2022)). For DA, a diffusion model should be trained to generate an ensemble of atmospheric states, given a set of observations. Many researchers are currently building and testing diffusion DA systems of this type (see, e.g., Allen et al., 2025; Bao et al., 2025, 2024a,b; Chung et al., 2023; Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026; Manshausen et al., 2025; Rozet and Louppe, 2023; Wang et al., 2026). Diffusion DA systems, however, cannot easily propagate information from one cycle to the next. The reason is that the training data essentially play the role of the prior: If the diffusion is trained on the equivalent of one long “free” model run (usually on ERA5), then the prior is static, not time-dependent. Consequently, such a diffusion DA system does not propagate information between successive assimilations. With a less-informed, static prior (higher variance), diffusion DA systems have a lower accuracy than fully cycling DA systems (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026). The optimal accuracy of a cycling DA with time-dependent priors can be achieved by re-training, but re-training diffusion models is expensive. In this paper, we demonstrate that diffusion DA systems benefit from conditioning on observations over a backward time-window during training. We argue that this backward window of observations can be short, partially inspired by linear systems theory, where Kalman filter updates forget past observations exponentially fast (Kozdoba et al., 2019). Indeed, we show for a canonical linear system that diffusion DA systems, conditioned on short backwards time windows, can achieve optimally small posterior error, matching the accuracy of a fully cycled DA system. Conditioning diffusion models on windows of past observations during training is thus essential for the accuracy of diffusion DA systems. But conditioning the diffusion on windows of past observations also has computational advantages. As we will show, the conditioning on windows of past observations emulates the effects of cycling priors, characteristic of traditional cycling DA systems, without the need for re-training the diffusion model. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the necessary background for this paper: Traditional DA via Kalman filters (Section 2.1), direct observation prediction (DOP) via Kalman filters (Section 2.2), and denoising diffusion generative modeling (Section 2.3). We describe in particular how to derive exact denoisers for reverse processes for Gaussian problems to avoid training neural networks. Section 3 explains that three sources of error interact in a diffusion DA system: Time discretization errors of the reverse process, Monte Carlo errors in the estimates of the loss functions, and approximation errors of neural networks that parameterize the denoiser. 2Section 4 describes how to define training data sets for diffusion DA systems (Section 4.1) and diffusion DOP systems (Section 4.2) that leverage backward time windows of observations. We work out a case study with a canonical linear system in Section 5 to illustrate our ideas and to show that diffusion DA/DOP systems conditioned on short backward time windows can be optimally accurate and indeed as accurate as a fully cycling DA/DOP system. Throughout, we focus on the idealized scenario in which the approximation errors discussed in Section 3 are small, but we also show how neural network approximations within the diffusion model introduce additional approximation errors. We conclude with a summary of our findings and a discussion of the implications of our study in Section 6. 

# 2 Background: Data assimilation, direct observation prediction and diffusion modeling 

We briefly review the basics of data assimilation (DA), direct observation prediction (DOP) and dif-fusion modeling. We focus on linear/Gaussian systems because subsequent analysis and numerical experiments are carried out in a linear Gaussian setup (and we explain why further below). 

2.1 Data assimilation 

The goal in traditional data assimilation (DA) is to update the state of a dynamical system it-eratively with information from observations. We focus here on relating filtering DA to diffusion modeling and we leave the comparison to a smoother for subsequent work. From the perspective of filtering DA, we denote the state at discrete time k ≥ 0 by the nx dimensional vector xk and the observation at time k by the ny dimensional vector yk. We thus compute or approximate the Bayesian posterior distribution of the state at time k, given the observations y1: k = {y1, y2, . . . , yk}:

p(xk|y1: k) = p(yk|xk)p(xk|y1: k−1). (1) Here, the term p(yk|xk) is the likelihood, defined by the observation model and p(xk|y1: k−1) is a time-dependent (cycling) prior (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026). Note that the time-dependent prior p(xk|y1: k−1) includes all past observations, y1: k−1. For that reason, the time-dependent prior has a smaller variance than, e.g., a climatological prior, p(xk). Hence, the correction required to transition from the time-dependent prior to the posterior is smaller than the correction required to transition from the climatological prior to the posterior. For a linear/Gaussian system the dynamics and observations are linear functions of the state, perturbed by mean-zero Gaussian noise: 

xk = Mx k−1 + εεεk−1, εεεk−1 ∼ N (0 , Q), iid , (2) 

yk = Hx k + ηk, ηk ∼ N (0 , R), iid , (3) where M and H are nx × nx and ny × nx matrices; εεεk and ηk are independently and identically distributed (iid) mean zero Gaussian random variables with symmetric positive definite (SPD) covariance matrices Q and R respectively ( Q is nx × nx and R ny × ny). Under linear and Gaussian assumptions, the state conditioned on the observations is Gaussian distributed and the Kalman filter (Kalman, 1960) is an efficient means to iteratively compute the mean and covariance of the Bayesian posterior distribution in (1), defined by the model and observation equations (2) and (3). 3Specifically, suppose the posterior probability density function (pdf) at time k − 1, p(xk−1|y1: k−1), is given by the Gaussian 

xk−1|y1: k−1 ∼ N (μk−1, Pk−1). (4) To compute the pdf at time k, we first compute the “forecast” mean and covariance 

μf = Mμk−1, Pf = MP k−1M⊤ + Q, (5) and then perform an analysis step which accounts for the current observations yk:

K = PfH⊤(HP fH⊤ + R)−1, (6) 

μk = μf + K(yk − Hμf), (7) 

Pk = (I − KH )Pf. (8) The result of the analysis is the updated posterior distribution xk|y1: k ∼ N (μk, Pk). The ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) (see, e.g., Anderson, 2001; Burgers et al., 1998; Evensen, 1994; Evensen et al., 2009; Ott et al., 2004; Tippett et al., 2003) can be used when the model and observation equations are nonlinear. The EnKF has proven to be efficient and effective in numerical weather prediction, provided localization and inflation are implemented to keep the ensemble size moderate (see, e.g., Anderson, 2003, 2007, 2012; Flowerdew, 2015; Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2023; Hunt et al., 2007; M´ en´ etrier et al., 2015; Morzfeld and Hodyss, 2023; Nerger, 2015) and provided that the DA problem is mildly nonlinear (Morzfeld and Hodyss, 2019). In the presence of stronger nonlinearity, “hybrid” variational methods (see, e.g., Buehner et al., 2013; Hamill and Snyder, 2000; Kuhl et al., 2013; Lorenc, 2003; Poterjoy and Zhang, 2015; Zhang et al., 2009), that combine the Monte Carlo approach of an EnKF with optimization characteristic of a variational DA system (see, e.g., Talagrand and Courtier, 1987), have proven to be the most accurate DA systems over the past few decades. 

2.2 Direct observation prediction 

Direct observation prediction (DOP) makes predictions of future observations based on past obser-vations. A natural target distribution is, thus, 

p(yk+1 |y1: k), (9) but, most DOP systems use a sliding window of observations (Alexe et al., 2024; Boucher et al., 2025; Lean et al., 2025; McNally et al., 2024, 2025; Pinnington et al., 2026) and the targeted pdf is 

p(yk+1 |yk−m:k), (10) for 0 < m < k . Here, the integer m defines the sliding window, which, at the time of writing and for the latest European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) DOP system is two days (Pinnington et al., 2026). In the linear/Gaussian setup in equations (2) and (3), the pdf (9), relevant to DOP, is a Gaussian and we can compute the mean and covariance as follows. At time k, the posterior distribution over the system state xk is Gaussian with mean μk and covariance matrix Pk (computed via the Kalman filter above). The predicted observation is, thus 

yk+1 |y1: k = HM · (xk|y1: k) + η, (11) 4where η is a mean zero Gaussian with covariance matrix R, so that 

yk+1 |y1: k ∼ N (HM μk, HMP kM⊤H⊤ + HQH ⊤ + R). (12) DOP systems generally avoid using the model M or the observation operator H and we explain below how this can be achieved via denoising diffusion generative modeling. We use (12) as a reference to assess the accuracy of a DOP system in a linear/Gaussian setting. We acknowledge that our treatment of DOP is simplified compared to what has been implemented in practice. Modern DOP systems (Pinnington et al., 2026) do not only forecast the next observations, but in fact forecast the full state. In practice, full state prediction from observations alone is done by “warm-up” cycles in which the DOP system is producing and processing full state estimates (Pinnington et al., 2026). This warm-up process is more difficult to study with mathematical rigor and we view our work below as a first step towards a mathematical understanding and theory for DOP systems that make full-state predictions. 

2.3 Denoising diffusion generative modeling 

We explain the basics of a denoising diffusion generative model and distinguish between (uncondi-tional) diffusion models and conditional diffusion models. For clarity and ease of presentation, we consider only the scalar case, but the theory naturally extends to vectors (see, e.g., Hodyss and Morzfeld (2026) for examples). 

2.3.1 Unconditional denoising diffusion generative modeling 

Given a set of ns data samples {si}, i = 1 , . . . , n s, from a distribution p(s), we want to generate more samples that also have the distribution p(s). Recall that the target pdf p(s) is not known analytically, but rather is only known through a long training set assumed to be drawn from this distribution. In NWP, this type of training data is typically obtained from a long-time series of previous DA products, observations, or a very long model run. Hodyss and Morzfeld (2026) consider several training sets that lead to different types of diffusion models. We focus on the “standard” technique, referred to as the “climatological prior,” in Hodyss and Morzfeld (2026), which is consistent with a fixed, long time series (e.g., ERA5) . To generate samples, we define a forward process u and a reverse process v, which satisfy stochastic differential equations (SDE). We follow Karras et al. (2022) and consider a variance exploding forward process u

du = √2tddWf, (13) where td is the diffusion time (not to be confused with “physical” time) and where Wf is a Wiener process with the properties that Wf (i) starts at zero, Wf(0) = 0; (ii) Wf has independent Gaussian increments ∆ Wf = Wf(td + ∆ td) − Wf(td) ∼ N (0 , ∆td); and (iii) Wf is almost surely continuous. We initialize the forward process with a sample u(0) = si and simulate the forward process up to time T ≫ 0. Note that the forward process amounts to sequentially adding Gaussian noise to the sample si. The corresponding reverse process v is the SDE dv = −2 E[u|v] − vtd

dtd + √2tddWr, (14) where Wr is also a Wiener process and where the conditional expectation is also called the “de-noiser:” 

D(v, t d) = E[u|v] = 

Z ∞−∞ 

u p (u|v)d u. (15) 5To draw samples from p(s), we initialize the reverse process at a large time T ≫ 0 and then integrate backwards in time to td = 0. At time td = 0, the distribution of v0 is p(·). 

2.3.2 Computing the denoiser 

The reverse process (14) requires that we compute the denoiser (15). The common strategy is to parameterize the denoiser by a deep neural network (NN) and train the network on the loss function 

L(θ) = Es∼ps(·)En∼N (0 ,t 2d) ∥s − DNN (θ; v = s + n, t d)∥22 , (16) whose minimizer is the conditional mean (15), and where we use θ to denote the network parameters, i.e., the weights and biases of the NN that define the denoiser. Typically, the denoiser is trained once and the resulting diffusion model is deployed. The once-and-for-all training, however, implies a static prior, which is problematic for DA (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026). In simple cases, we can compute the denoiser analytically, without using NNs. If the samples si are generated by a Gaussian with mean μ and standard deviation σ, then Bayes’ rule implies that 

p(u|v) ∝ p(u)p(v|u), (17) where v is the reverse process at time td, p(u) is the Gaussian target distribution and where 

p(v|u) ∝ exp − 12

 u − vtd

2!

, (18) due to our simple choice of the forward process. Thus, p(u|v) is the Gaussian 

p(u|v) ∝ exp − 12

 u − mσ

2!

exp − 12

 u − vtd

2!

, (19) whose mean is 

D(v, t d) = E[u|v] = μ + σ2

σ2 + t2d

(v − μ). (20) We note that the above formula generalizes easily to multivariate Gaussians (see Hodyss and Morzfeld (2026) for examples). 

2.3.3 Conditional denoising diffusion generative modeling 

In addition to sampling an empirical distribution defined by the training samples, i.e., sampling 

p(s), it is also possible to sample conditional distributions with extra inputs, say p(s|y), where 

y are additional inputs. For example, one can use denoising diffusion models to generate images conditioned on a text prompt: “ Generate an image of a surfing elephant ”. In this context, y are the text prompts and the training data set requires a set of images (samples si) with accompanying text prompts, i.e., {si, y i} pairs. The construction of the denoising diffusion is similar to what we described above, but the denoiser in (14) now requires y as additional inputs: 

D(v, y, t d) = E[u|v, y ] = 

Z ∞−∞ 

u p (u|v, y )d u. (21) The loss function that we use to train an NN to calculate the denoiser thus becomes 

L(θ) = Es∼p(s,y )En∼N (0 ,t 2d) ∥s − DNN (θ; v = s + n, y, t d)∥22 . (22) 6If p(s|y) is Gaussian, we can compute its mean μ and variance σ2 and define an “exact” Gaussian denoiser as in (20), using Bayes’ rule for the conditional density 

p(s|y, v ) ∝ p(s|y)p(v|s), (23) noting that p(v|s, y ) = p(v|s), due to the simple construction of the forward process (13). The differences between conditional and unconditional denoising diffusion generative models are stark. In the context of DA and NWP, an unconditional diffusion model samples a typical atmo-spheric state. A conditional diffusion can take in extra inputs in the form of past states and/or past observations to generate atmospheric states that are compatible with atmospheric conditions (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026; Price et al., 2025). Conditional denoising diffusion models are thus scientifically more useful than unconditional denoising diffusion models, which explains the increase of research activity in this field (see, e.g., Allen et al., 2025; Chung et al., 2023; Manshausen et al., 2025; Rozet and Louppe, 2023; Wang et al., 2026). The AI literature agrees that conditional diffusion models are computationally more expensive to build and to train than unconditional diffusion models. As a consequence, many researchers train an unconditional diffusion and then “guide” the unconditional diffusion towards the observations (see, e.g., Chung et al., 2023; Manshausen et al., 2025; Rozet and Louppe, 2023; Wang et al., 2026). We will not consider guided diffusion models in this paper and we will explain why after we discuss the importance of training conditional diffusion models on windows of past observations. 

# 3 Sources of errors in denoising diffusion generative models 

Denoising diffusion generative models are defined by continuous forward and reverse processes (equations (13) and (14)) and the loss functions associated with the denoisers (equations (16) and (22)) are formulated in terms of expectations over random variables. In practice, we discretize the forward and reverse processes and use Monte Carlo approximations for the expected values in the loss functions (16) or (22). The training data comes into play in the Monte Carlo approximations, where the expected values in (16) or (22) become sums (averages) over training samples si and noising steps ( n). Practical denoising diffusion systems are therefore characterized by three sources of discretization errors. 1. Time discretization errors in the forward and reverse processes: Keeping these errors small requires high-order SDE solvers and/or small time steps when simulating the reverse process for sample generation. 2. Monte Carlo errors in the approximation of the loss functions (16) or (22). Keeping these errors small requires a large number of training samples and a large number of noising steps, i.e., a large training data set. 3. Errors in the NN approximations of the denoiser. Keeping these errors small requires a careful design and training of the NN. Below, we build conditional denoising diffusion models for scalar, linear and Gaussian DA and DOP systems. The linear/Gaussian setup allows us to separate the three sources of error in denoising diffusion generative models. First, we can avoid Monte Carlo errors and errors due to NN approximations of the denoiser by computing analytical denoisers for Gaussian distributions. 7With Monte Carlo and NN approximation errors out of the picture, we can investigate the effects of time discretization errors, but our numerical experiments below suggest that these errors are negligible. The analytical denoisers effectively mimic a well-designed and well-trained denoising diffusion gen-erative model, with access to a large training data set. These assumptions are not unreasonable given that (i) decades of atmospheric data are available for training; and (ii) the success of gener-ative AI suggests that sufficiently accurate NN denoisers are within reach, provided one has access to sufficiently large computing resources. The linear/Gaussian setup thus indicates best-case performance scenarios for denoising diffusion generative models for DA and DOP and it allows us to highlight the importance of incorporating time windows of observations into diffusion DA and DOP systems, which us our main point. 

# 4 Diffusion models with observational memory for DA and DOP 

We describe how to design the training data for diffusion for DA or DOP systems. Our goal is to convincingly argue that diffusion DA/DOP should have an “observational memory,” i.e., the conditioning should include several past observations (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026), not just the current observation, as in some current diffusion DA systems (e.g., Manshausen et al., 2025). 

4.1 Diffusion models with observational memory for DA 

As stated before, the goal in DA is to approximate the posterior distribution of the current state, conditioned on all past observations, p(xk|y1: k) (see (1)). For a linear system, however, the Bayesian posterior distribution (1) is well approximated by a posterior distribution that is conditioned on a (finite) window of past observations 

p(xk|y1: k) ≈ p(xk|yk−m:k), (24) where the “memory” 0 < m < k is yet to be determined. The reason is that the influence of past observations on Kalman filter updates decays exponentially with time under broad conditions (Kozdoba et al., 2019). We believe it is reasonable to assume that observations in the distant past have no influence on the current state in nonlinear, chaotic dynamical systems such as Earth’s atmosphere. Using linearization and tangent linear adjoint models, we can in fact derive similar results for nonlinear problems intuitively (see Appendix A). One may view the approximation in (24) as a form of “temporal localization,” dampening the influence of observations in the distant past on current state estimates. The approximation (24), which we refer to as “observational memory,” is crucial for the design of diffusion DA systems, because it does away with the time-evolving, or “cycling” prior, characteristic of traditional DA systems. In the context of diffusion modeling for DA, the traditional cycling paradigm implies that the diffusion model must be retrained after each DA cycle (Bao et al., 2025, 2024a,b; Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026). To build a diffusion DA system without cycling one needs to use an observational memory, m. In terms of training data, the observational memory implies a training data set of current states, xk, accompanied by a window of past observations yk−m:k.Such a system approximates the posterior distribution p(xk|yk−m:k), which has a higher forecast skill than a system without observational memory ( m = 0), which targets the posterior distribution 

p(xk|yk) (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026). The memory m should be tuned or perhaps can be deduced from an analysis of the various time scales of the system. Our goal here is not to provide guidelines 8for how to find the memory m, but rather to show that a finite memory can be used to construct a diffusion DA system whose accuracy is similar to a diffusion DA system with an infinite memory, but without the need for re-training at each DA cycle. 

4.2 Diffusion models with observational memory for DOP 

Similar ideas apply to DOP. We approximate a posterior distribution with an “infinite” memory by a posterior distribution with a limited memory: 

p(yk+1 |y1: k) ≈ p(yk+1 |yk−m:k), (25) where 0 < m < k . The training data set for a diffusion DOP system thus consists of a (large) set of “future” observations yk+1 , along with inputs yk−m:k.We note that current DOP systems are implemented exactly like this, with m corresponding to a 12hr time window McNally et al. (2024, 2025), recently extended to two days by Pinnington et al. (2026). Current DOP systems, however, do not (yet) utilize denoising diffusion models. 

4.3 Feasbility and limitations 

Building training data sets for diffusion DA or DOP seems feasible using ERA5 and similar atmo-spheric “data,” along with the observational record, and one may attempt to train a large NN, using several GPUs or TPUs (as is currently underway for DOP (McNally et al., 2024, 2025; Pinnington et al., 2026)). We do not have access to such computational resources (few academics do), and we simply illustrate how to construct such diffusion DA/DOP systems for a canonical linear and Gaussian system. While far from realistic, our analysis and numerical experiments demonstrate the usefulness of observational memory in diffusion DA/DOP systems (using several past observations) compared to diffusion DA/DOP systems without observational memory (using only the current or most recent observation). The experiments are further designed to separate discretization errors in forward/reverse processes from errors arising from the NN approximations of the denoiser (see Section 3) which, as far as we know, has not been studied before in this context. 

# 5 Case study with a canonical linear system 

Following our earlier work (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2023), we consider as a forecast model a forward Euler discretization of the SDE dx = − 12 xdt + d W, (26) where, again, W is a Wiener process and the discretization is 

xk+1 = M x k + √∆tw k, (27) with time step ∆ t = 0 .1, M = 1 − 0.5∆ t = 0 .95, and where wk ∼ N (0 , 1) are iid standard normal random variables. Direct, but noisy, observations 

yk = xk + ηk (28) are available at each time step, where ηk ∼ N (0 , R ), with R = 1 throughout all experiments. Note that we use a scalar system, but the results trivially extend to the vector case discussed in our earlier work (Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2023). 95.1 Exact DA with and without observational memory 

We first consider a DA system with “infinite” observational memory, targeting the posterior dis-tribution p(xk|y1: k). This posterior distribution is Gaussian for the linear model and observation setup described above and the mean and variance of the Gaussian posterior distribution can be computed via the Kalman filter (see Section 2.1). Since the model and observation equations are also time invariant, i.e., the model M or the observation errors r do not change with time, the forecast variance Pf and the posterior covariance Pk converge for large enough k to steady-state values. The steady state forecast variance P ∞ 

> f

satisfies the quadratic (Riccati) equation 

P ∞ 

> f

= M 2



P ∞ 

> f

− (P ∞ 

> f

)2

P ∞ 

> f

+ R



+ ∆ t, (29) which can be solved for P ∞ 

> f

≈ 0.32 (matrix versions of this equation are well-known for multivariate systems). The steady state posterior variance P∞ can then be obtained by solving 

P ∞ 

> f

= M 2P∞ + ∆ t, (30) for P∞ to obtain P∞ ≈ 0.24. Thus, a well-working DA system with infinite memory should be characterized by a mean squared error (MSE) and posterior variance of about 0 .24. In contrast, a DA system without memory uses the posterior distribution 

p(xk|yk) ∝ p(xk)p(yk|xk), (31) which requires only the current observation yk. In this case, the prior p(xk) is the climatological distribution of the state xk of the dynamics (27), which can be shown to be a Gaussian with mean μc = 0 and variance 

Pc = 44 − ∆t ≈ 0.98 , (32) (see, e.g., Hodyss and Morzfeld, 2026). Since yk|xk ∼ N (xk, R ), a well-working DA system without memory should be characterized by a MSE and posterior variance 

Pno mem. = var( xk|yk) = Pc · RPc + R ≈ 0.49 , (33) which is about twice as large as what can be obtained with a DA system with infinite memory. Moreover, the posterior variance defined by the climatological prior in (33) is independent of k,but the posterior variance P∞ for a DA system with infinite memory, implicitly defined by (29) and (30), assumes that k is large. A DA system with finite observational memory m targets the posterior distribution 

p(xk|yk−m:k) ∝ p(yk|xk)p(xk|yk−m:k−1). (34) We can compute the mean and variance of this posterior distribution recursively using the Kalman filter. Specifically, at time k, we first use the observation yk−m to perform a Kalman filter update to the climatological mean ( μc = 0) and the climatological variance Pc in (30). The result is updated by a Kalman step using the observation yk−m+1 and the process is repeated until we reach the observation yk. In essence, we “spin-up” a Kalman filter from the climatological mean and variance using the observations yk−1: m.10 T_di ff =10, but 20 or 80 give the same results 

Exact DA 

Diffusion DA, exact denoiser 

MSE and variance 

Exact DA 

Diffusion DA, NN denoiser 

MSE and variance  

> (a) Exact DA and diffusion DA with exact denoiser (b) Exact DA and diffusion DA with NN denoiser

Figure 1: (a) MSE (filled circles) and posterior variance (open circles) as a function of the observa-tional memory m in a diffusion DA system. (a) Comparison of an exact DA (green) with a diffusion DA with an exact denoiser (orange). (b) Comparison of an exact DA (green) with a diffusion DA with a NN denoiser (purple). We illustrate the effects of observational memory in DA in Figure 1(a), where we plot MSE and posterior variance var( xk|yk−m), averaged over 10 4 DA cycles as a function of the memory m. Here, the MSE (for a scalar) is defined by MSE DA = ( xtk − μDA  

> k

)2, (35) where xtk is the true state at time k and where μDA  

> k

is the mean of xk|yk−m:k. As expected, the system without memory ( m = 0), has an MSE and variance of about 0.5 (see above). As the observational memory m increases, MSE and variance decrease and for large enough memory (m ≈ 9), MSE and posterior variance settle on values close to 0.24, which is identical to what a DA system with infinite memory can achieve, indicating that a finite memory is sufficient (Kozdoba et al., 2019). Note that the “exact DA” in Figure 1(a) does not use ensemble approximations, but rather computes the posterior mean and variance of xk|yk−m:k analytically. 

5.2 Diffusion DA with and without observational memory 

We investigate if denoising diffusion generative models can emulate the “exact” DA systems de-scribed above. First, we consider a diffusion DA system without approximation errors due to NN approximations of the denoiser and use analytical formulae for the denoiser for Gaussian dis-tributions (see Section 2.3.2). Specifically, we compute the mean and variance of the posterior distributions p(xk|yk−m:k) using the procedures described in Section 5.1, and then use the ana-lytical formula for the denoisier in (20) in the reverse process. Results are shown in Figure 1(a), where we plot MSE and posterior variance as a function of the memory m. MSE and variance are averaged over 10 4 DA cycles. The diffusion DA uses 5 · 10 3 samples (ensemble members) and the reverse process is discretized with a forward Euler scheme with time step ∆ td = 0 .1; the final diffusion time is T = 10. We find that the diffusion DA system almost perfectly emulates the “exact” DA system: MSE and variance are large without observational memory and gradually approach the MSE and variance 11 of a DA system with infinite observational memory. Indeed, MSE and variance are largely indis-tinguishable for diffusion DA or “exact” DA systems and the differences are due to the ensemble approximation of the mean and variance, and due to time discretization errors in the reverse pro-cess. The accuracy and equivalency of the diffusion DA system is no surprise because the use of the analytical denoiser models a situation in which the diffusion DA system is perfectly trained. In Figure 1(b) we consider a diffusion DA system with a NN denoiser, which is constructed and trained with standard methods (Karras et al., 2022). Specifically, the NN is a “decoder” with two layers of width 32 and 64 and we use a fully connected feed forward architecture; the activation functions are Rectified linear units (ReLU) in both layers. We use a training set of size 10 5 and recall that each training datum consists of a set of observations yk−m:k as inputs to the denoiser and the true state at time k to be used in the loss function (22). The training (optimization) uses Adam optimization with cosine annealing (initial learning rate 10 −1 and final learning rate 10 −6)for 120 epochs and a batch size of 500. For each sample, we use 100 noising steps with noise levels drawn form a lognormal distribution, Lognormal( −1.2, 1.22) (see Karras et al. (2022)). Figure 1(b) shows the analysis MSE (35) of the ensemble mean and the posterior variance, averaged over 10 4

DA cycles with 10 3 samples (ensemble members) and a diffusion time T = 10. We note that the MSE and variance curves match up with each other and that they are also close to what an ideal (exact) DA system can achieve (shown in green in Figure 1(b) for reference). The MSE and variance curves of the diffusion DA system with a NN denoiser, however, are more “noisy” than the corresponding curves of the idealized systems because the NN approximation of the denoiser induces approximation errors that are ignored in the diffusion DA system with an exact denoiser. In summary, our idealized numerical experiment suggests that it is indeed possible to construct a diffusion DA system with a finite observational memory that emulates best-case DA scenarios. Diffusion DA systems with finite observational memory require no re-training at each DA cycle and therefore, may overcome a significant computational barrier. The near optimal performance, however, relies on sufficient training of the NN denoiser, which we ensured via a large training data set (10 5) and thorough training for many epochs. 

5.3 Exact DOP with and without observational memory 

We now consider DOP systems and first consider an idealized system with an infinite memory that samples the pdf p(yk+1 |y1: k). The variance of yk+1 |y1: k is given in (12) and for large k, Pk → P∞.For our setup with H = 1, Q = ∆ t = 0 .1, R = 1, M = 1 − 0.5∆ t = 0 .95 and P∞ ≈ 0.24 (see above), we thus obtain a posterior variance of P DOP  

> ∞

≈ 1.32 which is also equal to the posterior MSE MSE DOP = ( yk+1 − 0.95 μDOP  

> k

)2, (36) where μDOP  

> k

is the posterior mean at time k (the mean of yk|yk−m:k). For large k this MSE and variance are optimally small. An “exact” DOP system with memory can be designed as follows. We first construct xk|yk−m:k

using a DA system with memory m and assimilate m consecutive observations yk−m:k starting from the climatological prior with mean zero and variance Pc ≈ 0.98 (as described in detail in the DA example above). We then use the mean and variance of xk|yk−m:k to compute 

yk+1 |yk−m:k = HM · (xk−m:k) + η, (37) (compare to (12)). In our scalar setup, all matrices are scalar and in particular H = 1, M = 0 .95, 

Q = ∆ t, R = 1. The result of using such a “cycling” DOP system are illustrated in Figure 2(a), 12 Exact DOP    

> Diffusion DOP, exact denoiser
> MSE and variance
> Exact DOP
> Diffusion DOP, NN denoiser
> MSE and variance
> (a) Exact DOP and diffusion DOP with exact denoiser (b) Exact DOP and diffusion DOP with NN denoiser

Figure 2: (a) MSE (filled circles) and posterior variance (open circles) as a function of the obser-vational memory m in a diffusion DOP system. (a) Comparison of an exact DOP (pink) with a diffusion DOP with an exact denoiser (brown). (b) Comparison of an exact DOP (pink) with a diffusion DA with a neural network denoiser (grey). where we plot MSE DOP and the variance of yk+1 |yk−m:k for various m, averaged over 10 4 DOP cycles. Note that the figure starts with a memory of m = 1 (not zero as in the case of DA in Figure 1), because we need at least one observation to make a prediction with a DOP system. For large m, we see that the MSE and variance of a DOP system with a finite memory approaches the optimal value of P DOP  

> ∞

≈ 1.32. For m = 1, we can also calculate the variance of y2|y1. First, the posterior variance of x1|y1 is (1 − K)Pc which, with K = Pc/(Pc + R), Pc ≈ 0.98, R = 1, is var( x1|y1) ≈ 0.49. The variance of y2|y1 is M 2 var( x1|y1)c + Q + R ≈ 1.55, as is also evident in Figure 2. The variance and MSE decay steadily with the memory m until the optimal value is reached (at about m ≈ 8). We emphasize that this DOP system is not practical and should not be used as is, since it essentially requires that we use a DA system to forecast the next observation (which is not the point of DOP). Nonetheless, this idealized DOP system illustrates that it is feasible, in principle, to design a DOP system with a finite memory that achieves virtually the same accuracy as a DOP system with an infinite memory, reiterating that yk+1 |y1: k is well approximated by yk+1 |yk−m:k for large m. Finally, we note that the idealized DOP system with memory does not make ensemble approximations, but rather computes the mean and variance of yk+1 |yk−m:k recursively, starting from the climatological prior. The diffusion DOP system described below does away with these limitations: No physical model is required for both training or using the diffusion DOP; moreover, a diffusion DOP model naturally generates an ensemble, not just a single observation/state estimate. 

5.4 Diffusion DOP with and without observational memory 

Next, we demonstrate that a diffusion DOP system with an “exact” denoiser can emulate the idealized DOP system with memory as described above. To set up the idealized diffusion DOP system, we compute the mean and variance of yk+1 |yk−m:k as described above and use the result to define the denoiser of the reverse process. We then perform 10 4 DOP cycles (5 · 10 3 samples) with this idealized diffusion DOP system and plot the associated MSE and variance, averaged 13 over all DOP cycles, in Figure 2(a). We note that the variances of the idealized diffusion DOP system closely follow the “exact” result, but the MSE is systematically a little lower than what is optimal. Since we can rule out approximation errors in the denoiser, we assign these differences to discretization errors in the reverse process, the finite diffusion time of T = 10, and the ensemble approximations of the mean and variance. Again, we emphasize that this diffusion DOP system is not supposed to be a practical algorithm, but rather a theoretical/numerical demonstration that a diffusion DOP system with a sufficiently large memory m can emulate a optimal DOP system with an infinite memory. Finally, we present results of a diffusion DOP system with a NN denoiser – such a diffusion system is, in principle, implementable and does not require any DA calculations. The denoiser is the same NN as described in Section 5.2 and we also use the same training procedure (but the training data set are now only observations, not true state and observations as in diffusion DA). MSE and variance are shown in Figure 2(b) for a system with 10 3 samples, a diffusion time T = 10 and diffusion time step ∆ t = 0 .1 (same setup as in the diffusion DA experiments). We note that the MSE and variance curves are more noisy than for the diffusion DOP system with an exact denoiser (Figure 2(a)), which we also observed in the experiments with diffusion DA (Figure 1(b)). We attribute deviations of MSE and variance of the diffusion DOP systems from the idealized case(s) to a combination of errors arising from NN approximations of the denoiser, interacting with discretization errors in the reverse process, the finite diffusion time T = 10 and the finite training data set. We can conclude, however, that it is possible to train diffusion DOP systems that are competitive and near optimal, even with a simple NN design and a straightforward training process. Most importantly, note that the diffusion DOP systems with a larger memory are more accurate than diffusion DOP systems with no or a short memory (this is true for exact system, diffusion systems with exact denoisers and diffusion systems with NN denoisers). The results thus suggest that it is important to incorporate windows of past observations into diffusion DOP systems to achieve a near optimal accuracy. 

# 6 Summary and discussion 

6.1 Summary 

We consider denoising generative diffusions for data assimilation (DA) and direct observation pre-diction (DOP). The goal in DA is to approximate the posterior distribution p(xk|y1: k), while DOP targets the distribution p(yk+1 |y1: k), where y1: k is shorthand notation for the set of observations from time 1 to time k (y1: k = {y1, y 2, . . . , y k}) and xk is the state. We note that both DA and DOP use conditional distributions which involve the entire time history of observations. Linear systems theory suggests that xk|y1: k is well approximated by xk|yk−m:k for sufficiently large memory m because the prediction of a Kalman filter on past observations decays exponentially (Kozdoba et al., 2019). Similar results hold for chaotic systems, because a chaotic system quickly “forgets” its initial condition (see Appendix A). The fact that only recent observations impact current state estimates suggests that one can design DA systems with a finite “observational memory,” i.e., approximating p(xk|yk−m:k), that achieve the same accuracy as a cycling DA system that approximates p(xk|y1: k)). Similarly, it should be feasible to design DOP systems with a finite observational memory (approximating p(yk+1 |yk−m:k)) that achieve the same accuracy as a DOP system with an infinite observational memory (approximating 

p(yk+1 |y1: k)). We demonstrate that this is indeed the case with a scalar, linear system. Using a 14 linear system enables us to demonstrate the effects of an observational memory without accounting for additional errors from ensemble approximations or approximation errors within diffusion models. Distributions that are conditioned only on a window of recent observations are amenable to diffusion modeling, while distributions that are conditioned on all past observations are not. The reason is that diffusion models that are conditioned on all past observations require re-training at every DA/DOP cycle and, therefore, are numerically not efficient (see also Bao et al. (2025, 2024a,b); Hodyss and Morzfeld (2026)). Conditioning only on a set of recent observations does away with frequent retraining and, therefore, makes diffusion models more efficient for DA or DOP, while not sacrificing accuracy. We demonstrated how to set up the training data for constructing diffusion DA and DOP systems with a finite observational memory and showcased their performance in idealized numerical exper-iments with a canonical, scalar linear system. The use of the linear system enables us to properly “ground-truth” the diffusion models, i.e., we can check that the diffusion systems sample the de-sired target distributions accurately. The numerical experiments suggest that it is indeed feasible to train diffusion DA or DOP systems on a set of recent observations and that these systems can achieve near optimal accuracy. In the process, we also explained that diffusion models suffer from three sources of errors that interact: (i) finite training data sets; (ii) neural network approximations of the denoiser; and (iii) discretization errors in the forward and reverse processes. We could separate the sources of error in the numerical experiments by considering “exact” denoisers for Gaussian distributions. The separation of errors, enabled by focusing on a linear system, is important here. First, we can show that in the absence of ensemble or diffusion approximation errors, DA/DOP systems with a finite memory can be virtually as accurate as DA/DOP systems with an infinite memory, which underlines the importance of incorporating a window of past observations into diffusion DA/DOP systems. Second, we can construct an exact denoiser that suppresses approximation errors induced by an NN denoiser and, therefore, emulates the performance of a well-trained diffusion DA/DOP system. With an exact denoiser, a large ensemble size and appropriate discretization of the reverse process, diffusion DA/DOP systems operate near optimally. Finally, using a NN denoiser on the same linear system reveals the additional errors that stem from the NN approximation of a denoiser and which can be assumed to be present in all “real-life” diffusion DA/DOP systems. Our results are obtained by considering a scalar linear model and one should be careful to draw conclusions about realistic or real DA and DOP systems. As indicated above, we use the linear setup here largely because it allows us to separate sources of errors in diffusion models and to partially avoid the construction and training of neural network denoisers (which we are not experts in). Nonetheless, our linear study is sufficient to underline the importance of an observational memory in diffusion DA or DOP system in nonlinear models: If linear models require an observational memory for improved accuracy, then it only seems natural to assume that nonlinear models will have this requirement as well. In our study, we neglected ensemble score filters (Bao et al., 2025, 2024a,b) and “guided diffusion models” (see, e.g., Chung et al., 2023; Manshausen et al., 2025; Rozet and Louppe, 2023), both of which have become popular over the past few years. The reason is that extending our study to these methods is not straightforward and perhaps warrants additional papers. To keep this paper concise and on point, we leave these ideas for future work. 15 6.2 Discussion 

At first glance, the diffusion DA systems we describe here are “model-free,” in the sense that the diffusion DA system consists entirely of a (discretized) reverse process and a neural-network denoiser; no “physics” model, i.e., no discretization of the dynamics of the atmosphere, is needed for diffusion DA. The reason is that a diffusion DA system does not “cycle,” i.e. it does not need a model to push the posterior forward to the next set of observations. A physical model, however, does appear during the building of the training set: When training a diffusion model with ERA5 or on synthetic true states generated by a model, then a physical model has been used to construct the diffusion DA system. Thus, while the deployment of a diffusion DA system is “model-free,” the training of a diffusion DA system requires a physics-based model and, possibly traditional DA (e.g., when using ERA5 for training). Direct observation prediction, however never uses a physical model, either in training or when deployed for prediction, and this technique is therefore truly “model-free.” Our study further suggests some broader implications for DA in general, i.e., independent of using a diffusion model to perform DA or DOP. 1. For more than 60 years, cycling DA, i.e., iteratively updating the last state estimate with the newest set of observations, has been the established DA paradigm. Our study shows that an AI-based DA system that utilizes a climatological prior in combination with an appropriately chosen observation window can perform just as effectively as a fully cycled system, indicating that strict adherence to the “cycling paradigm” may no longer be needed. 2. Iterative cycling over fairly short forecast windows naturally keeps the innovations small, which leads to better performance of DA techniques that require near-Gaussianity, such as the EnKF (Hodyss, 2011). ML/AI techniques with fully nonlinear function fitting do not rely on small innovations and, therefore, allow for a deviation from the iterative cycling paradigm. 3. Reusing observations is typically frowned upon because the derivation of the cycling DA equations requires that the prior be independent of the latest set of observations. In climato-logical prior-based DA systems as described here, however, one not only can use previously assimilated observations but –based on our results– should reuse as many observations as possible. Finally, a new AI-DOP system, called AIFS-DOP (Pinnington et al., 2026), was published by ECMWF while we were writing this paper and conducting our study. AIFS-DOP does not use dif-fusion models for ensemble forecasting, but makes one forecast given a set of observations. Nonethe-less, our theory nicely aligns with what has been implemented in AIFS-DOP: The system requires a “warm-up” period during which the AIFS-DOP system encounters observations over the past two days. While the AIFS-DOP paper makes no precise statements about how the two-day window was determined or what the forecasts errors for shorter windows were, we interpret the results reported by Pinnington et al. (2026) as a practical illustration of the theory we developed here, i.e., that using a window of past observations is important for the accuracy of AI-driven DA or DOP. 

# Acknowledgements 

MM is supported by the U.S. Office of Naval Research (ONR) Grant N000142512298. DH is supported by the U.S. Office of Naval Research (ONR grant N0001422WX00451. 16 Data statement 

The code used for making the figures will be made available on github once the paper is accepted for publication. [A] 

# A Exponential decay in nonlinear systems 

Let the nonlinear forward model from time t0 to tn be xn = M(x0). The tangent linear model (TLM) evaluating perturbation growth is the Jacobian M = ∂M 

> ∂x 0

. In a nonlinear, chaotic system, perturbations along the unstable manifold grow exponentially. Over a sufficiently long window ∆t = tn − t0, the dominant singular values of M scale as exp( λ∆t), where λ > 0 is the leading finite-time Lyapunov exponent. If we break the window into n discrete time steps, the forecast error covariance at time tn is the sum of the evolved initial uncertainty and the evolved model error injected at each time step i:

Pn = M0→nP0MT 

> 0→n

+

> n

X

> i=1

Mi→nQiMTi→n (38) where Mi→n is the tangent linear model from time ti to tn. Qi is the instantaneous model error added at step i. In a chaotic system with a leading finite-time Lyapunov exponent λ > 0, the tangent linear operator exponentially amplifies perturbations along the unstable manifold. The first term, P0, is propagated over the full window ∆ t = tn − t0. Its contribution to Pn scales as exp(2 λ∆t). An instantaneous model error Qi injected at a later time ti is only propagated over the remaining time tn − ti. Its contribution scales as exp(2 λ(tn − ti)). Because exponential growth heavily penalizes shorter propagation times, the term that has been growing the longest (which is the initial uncertainty) dominates the summation in (38). Thus, Pn ≈ M0→nP0MT

> 0→n

, which means the variance at tn scales as exp(2 λ∆t). The influence of an observation, yn, at time tn on the initial state, x0, is determined by the gain matrix, K0, config-ured as a smoother. Assuming a linear observation operator, H, and observation error covariance, 

R, the gain is: 

K0 = P0MT HT (HP nHT + R)−1 (39) We can evaluate the asymptotic behavior of K0 by examining its two primary components: 1. P0MT scales with the adjoint MT , growing at the rate exp( λ∆t). 2. As forecast errors grow to swamp observation errors, HP nHT ≫ R. The inverse ( HP nHT +

R)−1 therefore scales with P−1 

> n

, which decays as exp( −2λ∆t). Multiplying the scaling factors of these two components yields the asymptotic behavior of the smoother gain: 

K0 ∝ exp( λ∆t) × exp( −2λ∆t) = exp( −λ∆t) (40) This establishes that the sensitivity of the analysis at t0 to an observation at tn decays exponentially in time, governed strictly by the system’s leading Lyapunov exponent and does so in linear and nonlinear systems. Note that the fact that the cross-covariance grew as exp( λ∆t) states that the covariance between t = 0 and t = tn grows exponentially, which appears to imply that the covariance through time increases indefinitely. This only happens because we are calculating the 17 cross-covariance using a TLM. If we were to calculate this cross-covariance with a fully-nonlinear Monte-Carlo estimation procedure ( E[( x0 − x0)( xn − xn)]) we would find that the cross-covariance does not grow, but actually decays. This is because all physically realistic problems live on a finite attracting manifold and therefore this cross-covariance cannot grow forever. For this reason, the decay in equation (40) is actually an upper bound and realistic nonlinear problems are likely to decay even faster. 

# References 

Alexe, M., and Coauthors, 2024: GraphDOP: Towards skilful data-driven medium-range weather forecasts learnt and initialised directly from observations. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412. 15687, 2412.15687. Allen, A., and Coauthors, 2025: End-to-end data-driven weather prediction. Nature ,https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-08897-0. Anderson, J., 2001: An ensemble adjustment Kalman filter for data assimilation. Monthly weather review , 129 (12) , 2884–2903. Anderson, J., 2003: A local least squares framework for ensemble filtering. Monthly Weather Review ,

131 (4) , 634–642. Anderson, J., 2007: Exploring the need for localization in ensemble data assimilation using a hierarchical ensemble filter. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 230 (1) , 99–111, https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2006.02.011. Anderson, J. L., 2012: Localization and sampling error correction in ensemble Kalman filter data assimilation. Monthly Weather Review , 140 (7) , 2359–2371. Bao, F., H. G. Chipilski, S. Liang, G. Zhang, and J. S. Whitaker, 2025: Nonlinear ensemble filtering with diffusion models: Application to the surface quasigeostrophic dynamics. Monthly Weather Review , 153 (7) , 1155–1169, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-24-0069.1. Bao, F., Z. Zhang, and G. Zhang, 2024a: An ensemble score filter for tracking high-dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 432 ,117 447, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2024.117447. Bao, F., Z. Zhang, and G. Zhang, 2024b: A score-based filter for nonlinear data assimilation. 

Journal of Computational Physics , 514 , 113 207, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp. 2024.113207, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002199912400456X. Boucher, E., and Coauthors, 2025: Learning coupled Earth system dynamics with GraphDOP. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.20416, 2510.20416. Buehner, M., J. Mourneau, and C. Charette, 2013: Four-dimensional ensemble-variational data assimilation for global deterministic weather prediction. Nonlin. Processes Geophys. , 20 , 669– 682. Burgers, G., P. V. Leeuwen, and G. Evensen, 1998: Analysis scheme in the ensemble Kalman filter. 

Monthly weather review , 126 (6) , 1719–1724. Chung, H., J. Kim, M. T. Mccann, M. L. Klasky, and J. C. Ye, 2023: Diffusion posterior sam-pling for general noisy inverse problems. The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14687. 18 Evensen, G., 1994: Sequential data assimilation with a nonlinear quasi-geostrophic model us-ing Monte Carlo methods to forecast error statistics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans ,

99 (C5) , 10 143–10 162, https://doi.org/10.1029/94JC00572. Evensen, G., and Coauthors, 2009: Data assimilation: the ensemble Kalman filter , Vol. 2. Springer. Flowerdew, J., 2015: Towards a theory of optimal localisation. Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography , 67 (1) , 25 257, https://doi.org/10.3402/tellusa.v67.25257. Hamill, T. M., and C. Snyder, 2000: A hybrid ensemble Kalman filter-3D variational analysis scheme. Monthly Weather Review , 128 , 2905–2919. Hodyss, D., 2011: Ensemble state estimation for nonlinear systems using polynomial expansions in the innovation. Monthly Weather Review , 139 (11) , 3571 – 3588, https://doi.org/10.1175/2011MWR3558.1, URL https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/ mwre/139/11/2011mwr3558.1.xml. Hodyss, D., and M. Morzfeld, 2023: How sampling errors in covariance estimates cause bias in the Kalman gain and impact ensemble data assimilation. Monthly Weather Review , 151 (9) ,2413 – 2426, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-23-0029.1, URL https://journals.ametsoc.org/ view/journals/mwre/151/9/MWR-D-23-0029.1.xml. Hodyss, D., and M. Morzfeld, 2026: Using diffusion models to do data assimilation. Monthly Weather Review , 154 (2) , 165 – 182, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-25-0125.1, URL https: //journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/mwre/154/2/MWR-D-25-0125.1.xml. Hunt, B., E. Kostelich, and I. Szunyogh, 2007: Efficient data assimilation for spatiotemporal chaos: A local ensemble transform Kalman filter. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 230 (1) , 112–126, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2006.11.008. Kalman, R., 1960: A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Journal of Basic Engineering , 82 (1) , 35–45, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3662552. Karras, T., M. Aittala, T. Aila, and S. Laine, 2022: Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative models. 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 35 ,26 565–26 577. Kochkov, D., and Coauthors, 2024: Neural general circulation models for weather and climate. 

Nature , 632 , 1060–1066. Kozdoba, M., J. Marecek, T. Tchrakian, and S. Mannor, 2019: On-line learning of linear dynam-ical systems: Exponential forgetting in Kalman filters. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 33 , 4098–4105, https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33014098. Kuhl, D. D., T. E. Rosmond, C. H. Bishop, J. McLay, and N. L. Baker, 2013: Comparison of hybrid ensemble/4DVar and 4DVar within the NAVDAS-AR data assimilation framework. Monthly Weather Review , 141 , 2740–2758. Lam, R., and Coauthors, 2023: Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting. Sci-ence , 382 (6677) , 1416–1421, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adi2336, URL https://www. science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.adi2336, https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science. adi2336. Lang, S., and Coauthors, 2024: AIFS – ECMWF’s data-driven forecasting system. arXiv ,https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.01465. 19 Lean, P., M. Alexe, E. Boucher, E. Pinnington, S. Lang, P. Laloyaux, N. Bormann, and A. McNally, 2025: Learning from nature: insights into GraphDOP’s representations of the Earth System. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.18018, 2508.18018. Lorenc, A., 2003: The potential of the ensemble Kalman filter for NWP – a comparison with 4D-Var. 

Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , 129 (595) , 3183–3203, https://doi.org/ 10.1256/qj.02.132. Manshausen, P., and Coauthors, 2025: Generative data assimilation of sparse weather station observations at kilometer scales. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 17 (10) ,e2024MS004 505, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/2024MS004505. McNally, T., C. Lessig, P. Lean, M. Chantry, M. Alexe, and S. Lang, 2024: Red sky at night... producing weather forecasts directly from observations. ECMWF Newsletter , (178) ,30–34, https://doi.org/10.21957/tmc81jo4c7, URL https://www.ecmwf.int/en/publications/ newsletters. McNally, T., and Coauthors, 2025: An update on AI–DOP: skilful weather forecasts pro-duced directly from observations. ECMWF Newsletter , (182) , 15–18, https://doi.org/ 10.21957/tmi6y913dc, URL https://www.ecmwf.int/en/newsletter/182/earth-system-science/ update-ai-dop-skilful-weather-forecasts-produced-directly. M´ en´ etrier, B., T. Montmerle, Y. Michel, and L. Berre, 2015: Linear filtering of sample covariances for ensemble-based data assimilation. Part I: Optimality criteria and application to variance filtering and covariance localization. Monthly Weather Review , 143 , 1622–1643, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/MWR-D-14-00157.1. Morzfeld, M., and D. Hodyss, 2019: Gaussian approximations in filters and smoothers for data as-similation. Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography , 71 (1) , 1600 344, https://doi.org/ 10.1080/16000870.2019.1600344. Morzfeld, M., and D. Hodyss, 2023: A theory for why even simple covariance localization is so useful in ensemble data assimilation. Monthly Weather Review , 151 , 717–736. Nerger, L., 2015: On serial observation processing in localized ensemble Kalman filters. Monthly Weather Review , 143 (5) , 1554 – 1567, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-14-00182.1. Ott, E., and Coauthors, 2004: A local ensemble Kalman filter for atmospheric data assimilation. 

Tellus A , 56 , 415–428, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0870.2004.00076.x. Pinnington, E., and Coauthors, 2026: AIFS-DOP: End-to-end medium-range weather prediction from observations alone with machine learning. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.19093, 2606. 19093. Poterjoy, J., and F. Zhang, 2015: Systematic comparison of four-dimensional data assimilation methods with and without the tangent linear model using hybrid background error covariance: E4DVar versus 4DEnVar. Monthly Weather Review , 143 (5) , 1601–1621. Price, I., and Coauthors, 2025: Probabilistic weather forecasting with machine learning. Nature ,

637 , 84–90. Rozet, F., and G. Louppe, 2023: Score-based data assimilation. Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VUvLSnMZdX. 20 Talagrand, O., and P. Courtier, 1987: Variational assimilation of meteorological observations with the adjoint vorticity equation. i: Theory. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society ,

113 (478) , 1311–1328. Tippett, M., J. Anderson, C. Bishop, T. Hamill, and J. Whitaker, 2003: Ensemble square root filters. Monthly Weather Review , 131 (7) , 1485 – 1490, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(2003) 131 ⟨1485:ESRF ⟩2.0.CO;2. Wang, X., and Coauthors, 2026: Global attention with linear complexity for exascale generative data assimilation in earth system prediction. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.16590, 2604.16590. Zhang, F., M. Zhang, and J. A. Hansen, 2009: Coupling ensemble Kalman filter with four-dimensional variational data assimilation. Advances in Atmospheric Sciences , 26 , 1–8. 21